.3
Temperature Structure of the Atmosphere  . . . . . . . . . . .
Wind  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Freezing Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Wind Shear and Turbulence  . .
.19
Stability and the Diurnal Variation in Wind  . . . . . . .
Wind Shear  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Relationship Between Wind, Shear and Turbulence  .
.22
Topographical Effects on Wind  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.33
Thunderstorms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Life Cycle of a Thunderstorm  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.36
Types of Thunderstorms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Thunderstorm Hazards  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.40
Severe Thunderstorms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.63
Winter Storms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Within it storms are born, grow in intensity as they sweep across sections of
the  globe, then  dissipate.
Changes  from  one  state  to  another  are  called  phase  changes  and  are  readily
accomplished at ordinary atmospheric pressures and temperatures.
1-1 - Heat transfer and water vapour

How  much  water  the  air  contains  in  the  form  of  vapour  is  directly  related  to  its
temperature.
Air that con-
tains its maximum amount of water vapour, at that given temperature, is said to be
saturated.
A quick measure of the moisture content of the atmosphere can be made

BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 2

2

CHAPTER ONE

by looking at the dew point temperature.
The planetary heat engine consists of water being evaporated by the sun into water
vapour  at  the  equator  (storing  heat)  and  transporting  it  towards  the  poles  on  the
winds where it is condensed back into a solid or liquid state (releasing heat).
Most of
what we refer to as “weather,” such as wind, cloud, fog and precipitation is related to
this conversion activity.
The  excess  water  vapour  is  condensed  out  in  the  form  of  cloud
droplets or ice crystals which then can go on to form precipitation.
This compression causes
the air’s temperature to increase which will consequently lower its relative humidity.

As a result, areas in which subsidence occurs will not only receive less precipitation
than surrounding areas (referred to as a “rain shadow”) but will often see the cloud
layers thin and break up.


BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 4

4

CHAPTER ONE

Fig.1-6 - Moist air moving over mountains where it loses its moisture and sinks (cid:0)
              into a dry subsidence area

Temperature Structure of the Atmosphere

The temperature lapse rate of the atmosphere refers to the change of temperature
with  a  change  in  height.
In  the  normal  case, temperature  decreases  with  height
through the troposphere to the tropopause and then becomes relatively constant in the
stratosphere.


Two other conditions are possible: an inversion, in which the temperature increas-
es with height, or an isothermal layer, in which the temperature remains constant with
height.


1-7 - Different lapse rates of the atmosphere

BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 5

LAKP-British Columbia

5

The temperature lapse rate of the atmosphere is a direct measurement of the sta-

bility of the atmosphere.


If a parcel of air is displaced upwards and then released it is said to be unstable if it
continues to ascend (since the parcel is warmer than the surrounding air), stable if it
returns to the level from which it originated (since the parcel is cooler than the sur-
rounding air), and neutral if the parcel remains at the level it was released (since the
parcel’s temperature is that of the surrounding air).


The  type  of  cloud  and  precipitation  produced  varies  with  stability.
Unstable  air,
when lifted, has a tendency to develop convective clouds and showery precipitation.

Stable air is inclined to produce deep layer cloud and widespread steady precipitation.

Wind

Horizontal differences in temperature result in horizontal differences in pressure.
It
is these horizontal changes in pressure that cause the wind to blow as the atmosphere
attempts to equalize pressure by moving air from an area of high pressure to an area
of low pressure.
The larger the pressure difference, the stronger the wind and, as a
result, the day-to-day wind can range from the gentlest breeze around an inland air-
field to storm force winds over the water.


1-9 - The greater pressure changes with horizontal difference, the stronger the wind

Wind has both speed and direction, so for aviation purposes several conventions
have been adopted.
Wind direction is always reported as the direction from which the
wind  is  blowing  while  wind  speed  is  the  average  steady  state  value  over  a  certain
length of time.
Above the surface, the wind tends to be relatively smooth and changes direction
and speed only in response to changes in pressure.
At the surface, however, the wind
is affected by friction and topography.
Friction has a tendency to slow the wind over
rough  surfaces  whereas  topography, most  commonly, induces  localized  changes  in
direction and speed.


When a section of the troposphere, hundreds of miles across, remains stationary or
moves slowly across an area having fairly uniform temperature and moisture, then the

BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 7

LAKP-British Columbia

7

air takes on the characteristics of this surface and becomes known as an air mass.
Although the moisture and temperature characteristics of an air mass are relatively
uniform, the horizontal weather may vary due to different processes acting on it.
It is
quite possible for one area to be reporting clear skies while another area is reporting
widespread thunderstorms.


Across this transition zone temperature, moisture content,
pressure, and wind can change rapidly over a short distance.


Icing

One  of  simplest  assumptions  made  about  clouds  is  that  cloud  droplets  are  in  a 
liquid form at temperatures warmer than 0°C and that they freeze into ice crystals
within a few degrees below zero.
In reality, however, 0°C marks the temperature below
which water droplets become supercooled and are capable of freezing.
While some 
of the droplets actually do freeze spontaneously just below 0°C, others persist in the
liquid state at much lower temperatures.


Aircraft  icing  occurs  when  supercooled  water  droplets  strike  an  aircraft  whose
temperature is colder than 0°C.
• restriction of visibility as windshield glazes over.


The Freezing Process

When  a  supercooled  water  droplet  strikes  an  aircraft  surface, it  begins  to  freeze,
releasing latent heat.
The lower the air temperature and the colder the aircraft surface, the
greater the fraction of the droplet that freezes immediately on impact.
In general, the max-
imum potential for icing occurs with large droplets at temperatures just below 0°C.

Fig.
2-2 - Freezing of supercooled droplets on impact

Types of Aircraft Ice

Rime Ice 

Rime ice is a product of small droplets where each droplet has a chance to freeze
completely  before  another  droplet  hits  the  same  place.
BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 11

LAKP-British Columbia

11

Clear Ice

In the situation where each large droplet does not freeze completely before addi-
tional  droplets  become  deposited  on  the  first, supercooled  water  from  each  drop
merges and spreads backwards across the aircraft surface before freezing completely
to form an ice with high adhesive properties.
Mixed Ice

When the temperature and the range of droplet size vary widely, the ice that forms
is a mixture of rime ice and clear ice.
(b) Temperature Structure in the Cloud

Warm air can contain more water vapour than cold air.
The temperature structure in a cloud has a significant effect on the size and num-
ber of droplets.
Larger supercooled droplets begin to freeze spontaneously around
-10°C with the rate of freezing of all size of droplets increasing rapidly as temper-
atures  fall  below  -15°C.
The
exceptions are clouds with very strong vertical updrafts, such as towering cumulus
or cumulonimbus, where liquid water droplets can be carried to great heights before
freezing.


2-4 - Distribution of water droplet-ice crystals in cloud

(1) Within large cumulus and cumulonimbus clouds:

• at temperatures between 0°C and -25°C, severe clear icing likely.


• at temperatures between -25°C and -40°C, light rime icing likely; small possi-
bility of moderate to severe rime or mixed icing in newly developed clouds.


• at temperatures below -40°C, little chance of icing.


Supercooled Large Drop Icing 

Supercooled large drop (SLD) icing has, until fairly recently, only been associated
with freezing rain.
It was
found  that  large  cloud  drops, the  size  of  freezing  drizzle  drops, could  exist  within
some stratiform cloud layers, whose cloud top is usually at 10,000 feet or less.
The air
temperature within the cloud (and above) remains below 0°C but warmer than -18°C
throughout the cloud layer.
The pres-
ence of freezing drizzle underneath, or liquid drizzle when the surface air tempera-
ture is slightly above 0°C, is a sure indication of SLD icing within the cloud.
These low-level clouds often
produce drizzle or freezing drizzle.


If  the  air  temperature  at  cloud  level  is  below  freezing,
icing will occur in those clouds that produce a glory.


Other Forms of Icing

(a) Freezing Rain and Ice Pellets

Freezing rain occurs when liquid water drops that are above freezing fall into a
layer of air whose temperature is colder than 0°C and supercool before hitting
some object.
The most common scenario leading to freezing rain in British
Columbia is “warm overrunning”.
In such a scenario, rain that falls into the
cold air supercools, resulting in freezing rain that can last for hours especially if
cold air continues to drain into the area from the surrounding terrain.
When
the cold air is sufficiently deep, the freezing raindrops can freeze completely
before reaching the surface causing ice pellets.
Pilots should be aware, however,
that ice pellets at the surface imply freezing rain aloft.
(b) Freezing Drizzle or Snow Grains

Freezing drizzle is different from freezing rain in that the water droplets are
smaller.
Another important difference is that freezing drizzle may develop in air
masses whose entire temperature profile is below freezing.
In other words,
freezing drizzle can occur without the presence of a warm layer (above 0°C)

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
BC-E  
In this case, favorable areas for the development of freezing drizzle are in
moist maritime air masses, preferably in areas of moderate to strong upslope
flow.
The icing associated with freezing drizzle may have a significant impact
on aviation.
Similar to ice pellets, snow grains imply the presence of freezing
drizzle aloft.


Wet snow, however, can freeze hard to an aircraft surface that is
at subzero temperatures and be extremely difficult to remove.
Wet snow can also freeze to the windscreens
making visibility difficult to impossible.


Freezing Spray

Freezing spray develops over open water when there is an outbreak of Arctic
air.
While the water itself is near or above freezing, any water that is picked up
by the wind or is splashed onto an object will quickly freeze, causing a rapid
increase in weight and shifting the centre of gravity.


(e) Freezing Fog

Freezing fog is a common occurrence during the winter.
Fog is simply “a cloud
touching the ground” and, like its airborne cousin, will have a high percentage
of supercooled water droplets at temperatures just below freezing (0°C to -10°C).

Aircraft landing, taking off, or even taxiing, in freezing fog should anticipate
rime icing.


(b) Precipitation

Rain can reduce visibility, however, the restriction is seldom less than one mile
other than in the heaviest showers beneath cumulonimbus clouds.
Blowing snow is a product of strong winds picking up the snow
particles and lifting them into the air.
(i) Radiation Fog

Radiation fog begins to form over land usually under clear skies and light
winds typically after midnight and peaks early in the morning.
If an abundance of condensation
nuclei is present in the atmosphere, radiation fog may develop before the
temperature-dewpoint spread reaches zero.
BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 18

18

CHAPTER TWO 

Photo 2-2 - Radiation fog in a valley
(ii) Precipitation or Frontal Fog

credit: Alister Ling

Precipitation fog, or frontal fog, forms ahead of warm fronts when precipi-
tation falls through a cooler layer of air near the ground.
The precipitation
saturates the air at the surface and fog forms.
Breaks in the precipitation
usually results in the fog becoming thicker.

(iii) Steam Fog 

Steam fog forms when very cold arctic air moves over relatively warmer
water.
In con-
ditions of light winds and temperatures colder than -30°C or so, water vapour
from manmade sources or cracks in ice-covered rivers can form widespread
and persistent ice fog.
(d) Snow Squalls and Streamers

Snow squalls are relatively small areas of heavy snowfall.
Movement of these snow squalls can gen-
erally be tied to the mean winds between 3,000 and 5,000 feet.
2-6 - Snowsqualls building over open water

Wind, Shear and Turbulence

The “why” of winds are quite well understood.
It is the daily variations of the winds,
where they blow and how strong, that remains a constant problem for meteorologists
to unravel.
The problem becomes even more difficult when local effects such as wind
flow  through  coastal  inlets  or  in  mountain  valleys  are  added  to  the  dilemma.
The
result of these effects can give one airport persistent light winds while another has
nightly episodes of strong gusty winds.


Stability and the Diurnal Variation in Wind


In a stable weather pattern, daytime winds are generally stronger and gustier than
nighttime winds.
During the day, the heating from the sun sets up convective mixing
which carries the stronger winds aloft down to the surface and mixes them with the
slower surface winds.
This causes the surface wind to increase in speed and become
gusty, while at the same time reducing the wind speeds aloft in the mixed layer.


After sunset, the surface of the earth cools which, in turn, cools the air near the sur-
face resulting in the development of a temperature inversion.
This inversion deepens
as cooling continues, ending the convective mixing and causing the surface winds to
slacken.


BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 20

20

CHAPTER TWO 

Wind Shear

Wind shear is nothing more than a change in wind direction and/or wind speed
over the distance between two points.
Significant shearing can occur when the surface wind blowing along a valley varies
significantly from the free flowing wind above the valley.
2-7 - Wind shear near the top of a valley

Updrafts and downdrafts also induce shears.
BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 21

LAKP-British Columbia

21

Mechanical turbulence is a form of shear induced when a rough surface disrupts the
smooth wind flow.
The amount of shearing and the depth of the shearing layer depends
on the wind speed, the roughness of the obstruction and the stability of the air.


The Relationship Between Wind Shear and Turbulence

Turbulence is the direct result of wind shear.
Low-Level Jets - Frontal

In  developing  low  pressure  systems, a  narrow  band  of  very  strong  winds  often
develops just ahead of the cold front and above the warm frontal zone.
Meteorologists
call these bands of strong winds “low-level jets”.
Wind speeds associated with
low-level  jets  can  reach  as  high  as  100  knots  in  more  intense  storms.
Critical periods for low-level windshear or turbulence
with these features are one to three hours prior to a cold frontal passage.
2-9 -  Complex winds around low level jet can result in 
                significant low-level wind shear and turbulence 

Low-Level Jets - Nocturnal

There is another type of low-level jet known as “the low-level nocturnal jet”.
This
jet  is  a  band  of  relatively  high  wind  speeds, typically  centred  at  altitudes  ranging
between 700 and 2,000 feet above the ground (just below the top of the nocturnal
inversion) but on occasion can be as high as 3,000 feet.
Wind speeds usually range
between 20 and 40 knots but have been observed up to 60 knots.


The winds just below the top of the inversion will begin to
increase just after sunset, reach its maximum speed a couple of hours after midnight,
then dissipate in the morning as the sun’s heat destroys the inversion.


Topographical Effects on Wind

(a) Lee Effects

When the winds blow against a steep cliff or over rugged terrain, gusty turbu-
lent winds result.
Eddies often form downwind of the hills, which create sta-
tionary zones of stronger and lighter winds.
These zones of strong winds are
fairly predictable and usually persist as long as the wind direction and stability
of the air stream do not change.
The lighter winds, which occur in areas called
wind shadows can vary in speed and direction, particularly downwind of higher

BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 23

LAKP-British Columbia

23

hills.
In the lee of the hills, the wind is usually gusty and the wind direction is
often completely opposite to the wind blowing over the top of the hills.
The winds that blow well above the surface of the earth are not strongly influ-
enced by the presence of the earth itself.
Closer to the earth, however, frictional
effects decrease the speed of the air movement and back the wind (turns the
wind direction counter-clockwise) towards the lower pressure.
For example, in
the northern hemisphere, a southerly wind becomes more southeasterly when
blowing over rougher ground.
There can be a significant reduction in the wind
speed over a rough terrain when compared to the wind produced by the same
pressure gradient over a relatively smooth prairie.


2-11 - Friction effects

(c) Converging Winds

When two or more winds flow together or converge, a stronger wind is created.

BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 24

24

CHAPTER TWO 

10 KT

15 KT

25 KT

Fig. 2-12 - Converging winds(cid:0)

(d) Diverging Winds

A divergence of the air stream occurs when a single air stream splits into two or
more streams.
2-13 - Diverging winds(cid:0)

(e) Corner Winds 

When the prevailing wind encounters a headland
, there is a tendency for the
wind to curl around the feature.
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 25

LAKP-British Columbia

25

Fig. 2-14 - Corner winds

(f ) Funnelled or Gap Winds

When winds are forced to flow through a narrow opening or gap, such as an
inlet or narrow section of a pass, the wind speed will increase and may even
double in strength.
2-15 - Funnelled winds

(g) Channelled Winds

The topography can also change the direction of the winds by forcing the 
flow along the direction of a pass or valley.
(h) Sea and Land Breezes

Sea and land breezes are only observed under light wind conditions, and
depend on temperature differences between adjoining regions.


2-17 - Land breeze

Both sea and land breezes can be influenced by channelling and funnelling
resulting in almost frontal-like conditions, with sudden wind shifts and gusty
winds that may reach up to 50 knots.
Example of this can be found near the
larger lakes in BC are often referred to as “lake effect winds”.


(i) Anabatic and Katabatic Winds


As a result, the winds blow up slope.

These daytime, upslope winds are called anabatic winds.
An anabatic wind, if extended to sufficient height, will produce cloud.
In
addition, such a wind offers additional lift to aircraft and gliders.


2-18 - Anabatic winds(cid:0)


If the
valley floor is sloping, the winds will move along the valley towards lower ground.

The cool night winds are called drainage winds, or katabatic winds, and are often
quite  gusty  and  usually  stronger  than  anabatic  winds.
Some  valley  airports  have
windsocks situated at various locations along their runways to show the changeable
conditions due to the katabatic flow.


2-19 - Katabatic winds(cid:0)

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 28

28

CHAPTER TWO 

(j) Glacier Winds

Under extreme cooling conditions, such as an underlying ice cover, the katabat-
ic winds can develop to hazardous proportions.
As the ice is providing the cool-
ing, a shallow wind of 80 knots or more can form and will persist during the
day and night.
2-20 - Glacier winds

It is important to recognize that combinations of these effects can operate at any
given  time.
Katabatic  winds  are  easily  funnelled  resulting  in  winds  of  unexpected
directions and strengths in narrow passes.
Around glaciers in the summer, wind fields
can be chaotic as katabatic winds from the top of the glacier struggle for dominance
with localized convection or anabatic winds induced by heated rock slopes below the
ice.
The Formation of Lee Waves

The development of lee waves requires that several conditions be met:

(a) the wind direction must be within 30 degrees of perpendicular to the mountain
or hill.
BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 29

LAKP-British Columbia

29

(b) wind speed should exceed 15 knots

for small hills and 30 knots for moun-
tain ridges.
A jet stream with its asso-
ciated strong winds below the jet axis
is an ideal situation.


(c) the wind direction should be constant
while increasing in speed with height
throughout the troposphere.


2-21 - Angles for lee wave (cid:0)
                 development

While all these conditions can be met at any time of the year, winter wind speeds

are generally stronger resulting in more dangerous lee waves.


Characteristics of Lee Waves

Once a lee wave pattern has been established, it follows several basic rules:

• stronger the wind, the longer the wavelength.
The typical wavelength is about 6

miles but can vary from as short as 3 miles to as long as 15 miles.

• position of the individual wave crests will remain nearly stationary with the
wind blowing through them as long as the mean wind speed remains nearly
constant.


• wind speed is stronger through the wave crest and slower through the wave

trough.


• downdrafts are frequently found on the downwind side of the obstruction.


2-23 - Stronger wind in wave crest in lee waves

Fig.
On occasion, when the shear results in turbulence, the lenticular cloud will take
on a ragged and wind torn appearance.


It will appear as a long
line of stratocumulus, a few miles downwind and parallel to the ridge.
When the winds blow across a
front, it tends to move with the wind.
When winds blow parallel to a front, the front
moves slowly or even becomes quasistationary.
When this happens, the weather at a front can vary
from  clear  skies  to  widespread  cloud  and  rain  with  embedded  thunderstorms.
Insufficient moisture
results in “dry” or “inactive” fronts that may be marked by only changes of tem-
perature, pressure and wind.
Stable air will produce stratiform cloud accompanied by
steady precipitation and little or no turbulence.


(c) slope of the front

A shallow frontal surface such as a warm front produces widespread cloud and
steady precipitation.
Such areas are susceptible to the formation of low stratus
cloud and fog and may have an area of freezing precipitation.
Passage of such a
front is usually noted by the end of the steady precipitation, followed by a slow
reduction in the cloud cover.

Frontal Waves and Occlusions

Small-scale changes in pressure along a front can create localized alterations in the
wind  field  resulting  in  a  bending  of  the  front.
Such features, known as stable waves, tend to move rapidly
(25 to 60 knots) along the front and are accompanied by a localized area of
heavier cloud and precipitation.
The air mass stability around the wave deter-
mines the cloud and precipitation type.
BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 34

34

CHAPTER TWO 

Cold Air

◗

▼

◗

▼

◗

▼

◗

▼

◗

▼

◗

▼

◗

◗

Warm Air

Cold Air
▼

▼

◗

▼
▼
Warm Air

◗

◗

▼

▼

◗

▼

◗

◗

▼

▼

Cold
Air
▼
▼
▼
Warm Air

▼

▼

▼

▼

Wave
Crest

◗

◗

◗

◗

◗

Warm
Sector

◗ ◗

◗

◗

▼

▼

◗

◗

Cold Air

◗

◗
◗

◗

◗

▼
Warm Air

▼

◗

◗ ◗

Fig 2-27 - Stable wave

(b) Unstable (Occluding) Waves

Given additional support for development, such as an upper trough, the surface
pressure will continue to fall near the frontal wave, causing the formation of a
low pressure centre and strengthening winds.
The wind behind the cold front
increases causing the cold front to accelerate and begin to wrap around the low.

Along the occlusion, the weather is a combination of a warm front and a cold front;
that  is, a  mix  of  layer  clouds  with  steady  precipitation  and  embedded  convective
clouds with enhanced showery precipitation.
2-29 - Frontal cross-sections 

COOL
AIR

COLD
AIR

D

E

COOL
AIR

F

Thunderstorms

No weather encountered by a pilot can be as violent or threatening as a thunder-
storm.
Thunderstorms produce many hazards to the aviation community, and since
they  are  so  commons  in  summer  time, it  is  important  that  pilots  understand  their
nature  and  how  to  deal  with  them.
To  produce  a  thunderstorm, there  are  several
ingredients which must be in place.
These include:

• An unstable airmass
• Moisture in the low levels
• Something to trigger them, e.g. daytime heating, upper level cooling
• For severe thunderstorms, wind shear.


No weather encountered by a pilot can be as unpredictable or as violent as a thun-
derstorm.
There are few severe weather hazards that a thunderstorm does not pack,

BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 36

36

CHAPTER TWO 

and  with  thunderstorms  being  common, it  is  important  that  a  pilot  understands  a 
little about their nature and how to deal with them.


The Life Cycle of a Thunderstorm

The  thunderstorm, which  may  cover  an  area  ranging  from  5  miles  in  diameter 
to, in the extreme case, as much as 50 miles, usually consists of two or more cells in
different stages of their life cycle.
2-30 -Top-down view of a thunderstorm "family" containing 
                 cells in different stages of development

(a) Cumulus Stage


These updrafts can reach values
of up to 3,000 feet per minute and cause the cloud to build rapidly upwards,
carrying supercooled water droplets well above the freezing level.
(b) Mature Stage

The appearance of precipitation beneath the base of the cell and the develop-
ment of the downdraft mark the transition to this stage.
2-33- Dissipating Stage

The downdraft, when it hits the ground, spreads out in all directions but travels
fastest in the direction that the storm is moving.
The leading edge of this cold
air is called the “gust front” and can extend ten to fifteen miles, or even further,
when channelled along mountain valleys in front of the storm.
A rapid drop in
temperature and a sharp rise in pressure characterize this horizontal flow of
gusty surface winds.


Strong upper winds at the tropopause level assist in the spreading out
of this flow in the downwind direction, producing the traditional anvil-shaped
top.
The thunderstorm may have a base measuring from 5 miles to more than 
15 miles in diameter and a top ranging from as low as 20,000 feet to more than
50,000 feet.
The mature stage is the most violent stage in the life a thunderstorm
and usually lasts for 20 to 30 minutes.


However, at times, the upper winds increase strongly with height causing
the cell to tilt.
In such a case, the precipitation falls through only a portion of
the cell, allowing the updraft to persist and reach values of 10,000 feet per
minute.
Such cells are referred to as “steady state storms” that can last for sever-
al hours and produce the most severe weather, including tornadoes.


At this
stage the anvil, which is formed almost exclusively of ice crystals, often detach-
es and drifts off downwind.


BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 38

38

CHAPTER TWO 

Types of Thunderstorms

(a) Air Mass Thunderstorms

These thunderstorms form within a warm, moist air mass and are non-frontal
in nature.
There is also a second form of air
mass thunderstorm that is created by cold advection.
Of these two, it is 
the movement of cold air over warm water that results in the most frequent
occurrence of this type of thunderstorm.
Since the heating is constant, these
thunderstorms can form at any time of day or night.

Fig.
2-35 - Cool air heated by 
                 warm water

(b) Frontal Thunderstorms

These thunderstorms form either as the result of a frontal surface lifting an
unstable air mass or a stable air mass becoming unstable, as a result of the lift-
ing.
Frontal thunderstorms can be found along cold fronts, warm fronts and
trowals.
These thunderstorms tend to be numerous in the area, often form in
lines, are frequently embedded in other cloud layers, and tend to be active dur-
ing the afternoon and well into the evening.
Cold frontal thunderstorms are
normally more severe than warm frontal thunderstorms.


2-36 - Warm frontal thunderstorms

(c) Squall Line Thunderstorms 

A squall line (or line squall) is a line of thunderstorms.
Squall lines can be sev-
eral hundred miles long and have lower bases and higher tops than the average
thunderstorm.
Violent combinations of strong winds, hail, rain and lightning
makes them an extreme hazard not only to aircraft in the air, but also to those
parked uncovered on the ground.

Squall line thunderstorms are most often found 50 to 300 miles ahead of a
fast-moving cold front but can also be found in accompanying low pressure
troughs, in areas of convergence, along mountain ranges and even along sea
breeze fronts.


(d) Orographic Thunderstorms

Orographic thunderstorms occur when moist, unstable air is forced up a moun-
tain slope.
In such
situations, these storms frequently produce copious amounts of hail.


2-37 - Orographic thunderstorms

BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 40

40

CHAPTER TWO 

(e) Nocturnal Thunderstorms 

Nocturnal thunderstorms are those that develop during or persist all night.

Severe Thunderstorms

The discussion of the life cycle of a thunderstorm does not fit the case of those that
seem to last for extended periods of time and are most prolific in producing torna-
does  and  large  hail.
A  particular  type  of  severe  thunderstorm  is  known  as  a
“Supercell”.


A severe storm typically begins as a multi-cellular thunderstorm.
However, because
the upper winds increase strongly with height, the cell begins to tilt.
This causes the
descending  precipitation  to  fall  through  only  a  portion  of  the  cell, allowing  the
updraft to persist.


The third and final stage of storm’s evolution is the collapse phase.
It is at this time that the strongest tornadoes and straight-line winds occur.


Fortunately these types of storms are rare in BC and are almost exclusivily confined

to the central and northern part of the province.


Thunderstorm Hazards 

The  environment  in  and  around  a  thunderstorm  can  be  the  most  hazardous
encountered by an aircraft.
In addition to the usual risks such as severe turbulence,
severe  clear  icing, large  hail, heavy  precipitation, low  visibility  and  electrical  dis-
charges within and near the cell, there are other hazards that occur in the surround-
ing environment.


(a) The Gust Front

The gust front is the leading edge of any downburst and can run many miles
ahead of the storm.
Aircraft taking off, landing, or oper-
ating at low levels can find themselves in rapidly changing wind fields that
quickly threaten the aircraft’s ability to remain airborne.
In a matter of seconds,
the wind direction can change by as much 180°, while at the same time the
wind speed can approach 100 knots in the gusts.
Extremely strong gust fronts
can do considerable damage on the ground and are sometimes referred to as
“plow winds.”
A downburst is a concentrated, severe downdraft which accompanies a
descending column of precipitation underneath the cell.
When it hits the
ground, it induces an outward, horizontal burst of damaging winds.
A macroburst is a downdraft of air with an outflow diameter of 2.2 nautical
miles, or greater, with damaging winds that last from 5 to 20 minutes.
Microbursts have an outflow diameter of less
than 2.2 nautical miles and peak winds lasting from 2 to 5 minutes.
Such winds
can literally force an aircraft into the ground.


External Downdraft
due to evaporation
cooling

Cloud

Direction of travel

Inflow to storm

Cold air

Outflow from storm

Gust front

Fig.
2-38 - “Steady state” tilted thunderstorm

Fig.
2-39 - The gust front

(c) Funnel Cloud, Tornado and Waterspout

The most violent thunderstorms draw air into their base with great vigor.
The
incoming air tends to have some rotating motion and, if it should become con-
centrated in a small area, forms a rotating vortex in the cloud base in which
wind speeds can exceed 200 knots.
Any severe thunderstorm should be avoided be a wide margin as all are extremely

hazardous to aircraft.


BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 42

42

CHAPTER TWO 

Photo 2-3 - Severe thunderstorm  

credit Alister Ling

F-Scale 
Number

FO 

F1 

 F2 

F3

F4 

 Intensity Phrase  Wind Speed 

 Type of Damage Done

(kts)

35-62

Weak
Tornado 

Moderate
 Tornado

 63-97  


The lower limit is the beginning of hurricane wind speed; 
peels surface off roofs; mobile homes pushed off foundations 
or overturned; moving autos pushed off the roads; attached 
garages may be destroyed.

 
Temperature Inversion and Cold Air Outbreaks

Low level inversions are common in most areas during the fall and winter due to
very cold outbreaks and strong radiation cooling.
At the same time, the convection enhances any snowfall result-
ing in areas of extremely poor visibility.


In conditions

BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 44

44

CHAPTER TWO 

of light winds and temperatures colder than -30°C or so, such as those that might be
found  in  Fort  Nelson, water  vapour  from  anthropogenic  sources  (man-made)  can
form widespread and persistent ice fog or ice crystals.
In light winds, the visibility can
be reduced to near zero, closing an airport for hours.


Blowing Snow

Blowing  snow  can  occur  almost  anywhere  where  dry  snow  can  be  picked  up  by
strong winds but poses the greatest risk away from the forested areas of the Prairies.

As winds increase, blowing snow can, in extreme conditions, reduce horizontal visi-
bility at runway level to less than 100 feet.


As  the  aircraft  moves  into  an  area  with  a  strong  low-level
inversion  and  very  cold  surface  temperatures, the  plane  descends  gradually  as  it 
follows the constant pressure surface corresponding to an indicated altitude of 10,000

BC-E  
This ash is then spread downwind by the winds aloft
in the troposphere and the stratosphere.


Windscreens have been abraded until they become opaque.


Deformation Zone 

A deformation zone is defined as “an area in the atmosphere where winds converge
along one axis and diverge along another.
Deformation zones (or axis of deformation
as they are sometimes referred to) can produce clouds and precipitation.”
More sim-
ply put, we are referring to areas in the atmosphere where the winds flow together
(converge) or apart (diverge), resulting in areas where air parcels undergo stretching
along  one  axis  and  contraction  along  another  axis.
Meteorologically, this  is  an  area
where significant cloud amounts, precipitation, icing and turbulence can occur to in
the induced vertical currents.


In this area, thick cloud layers form giving wide-

BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 46

46

CHAPTER TWO 

spread precipitation.
Depending on the temperatures aloft, this cloud may also con-
tain significant icing.
During the summer, the edges of this cloud area will often have
thunderstorms  develop  in  the  afternoon.
If  this  area  of  cloud  is  slow  moving, or
should it interact with terrain, then the upslope areas can see prolonged precipitation.

Winds  shear  in  the  ascending  air  will  often  give  turbulence  in  the  middle-and 
higher-levels.


Precipitation here tends to be more inter-
mittent or showery.
Wind shear can also cause turbulence but most often it is con-
fined to the low-levels.


What are the predominate winds at
Penticton?  
The ocean also supplies heat which acts to moderate the temperatures along the
coast, as compared to the inland areas.
In turn, this moderation of temperature plays
a significant role in determining just what type of precipitation will fall over the area.

This causes the low to intensify resulting in rapidly falling pres-
sures and strengthening winds.


Storms  approaching
the  coast  are  lifted  rapidly  along  the  windward  slopes, resulting  in  widespread 
precipitation.
Much of the heaviest precipitation occurs along the western slopes of
the Insular Mountains and the Olympic Mountains of Northern Washington State
(elevation  6,000  to  8,000  feet).
The  variability  in  annual  precipitation  between 
upslope  areas  and  subsident “rain  shadow” areas  is  significant.
Tofino, on  the  west
coast of Vancouver Island, receives an average of 3,000 millimetres of precipitation
each  year  while  Nanaimo, on  the  east  coast  of  Vancouver  Island, receives  a  paltry
1,150 millimetres.
Lacking the sheltering bulk of Vancouver Island, ocean storms can run right
up onto the coast venting their full fury.


Page 53

LAKP-British Columbia

53

The heat from the ocean strongly moderates coastal temperatures; however, outflow
winds through the inland valleys can easily carry cold air from the interior.
During
the winter this clash between warmer coastal air and cold air flowing out of the inte-
rior can make for extremely variable precipitation types.


Sitting to the lee of these mountains, subsi-
dence  has  reduced  the  precipitation  so  that  much  of  the  area  is  arid  or  semi-arid.


BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 54

54

CHAPTER THREE 

Annual precipitation ranges between 250 and 360 millimetres per year and tends to
be divided up nearly equally between the various months.


3-1 - The most notable effect of mountains is their impact on precipitation

Summer  in  this  area  is  noted  for  the  incursion  of  the  Pacific  High  and  the 
development of hot and dry weather.
The weather tends to be dry and sunny with late
afternoon or evening thunderstorms occurring mainly along the ridges.
Eventually,
the  Pacific  High  does  break  down  and, when  this  happens, it  is  common  for 
widespread thunderstorms to develop as cooler, moist air begins to move into the area.


This being said, the temperatures in
the area do tend to hover around freezing, and the cold surface layer can be difficult
to remove, as the warm air moving in from the coast rides over the top of the cold air.

The only real warming occurs with southerly winds, but this respite only lasts a few
days as cold air is quick to re-establish itself in the valley bottoms.


On  the  small  scale, the  changing  topographical  features  such  as  elevation,
orientation  to  the  mean  winds, slope, and  exposure  all  combine  to  alter  the  local 
climate.
Higher  elevations  tend  to  have  lower  average  temperatures  and  increased
precipitation.
All  but  the  strongest
incursions of Arctic air are held out of the southern British Columbia interior, main-
taining temperatures much above those on the Prairies.


Moderate  to  heavy  thunder-
storms are not uncommon and, on occasion, a tornado or funnel cloud will be report-
ed in the Prince George area.
The occasional cold low does
move  across  the  area; however, giving  widespread  precipitation  and  cloudy, cool 
conditions.
Warm air moving eastward overtop
the cold air will give snow but does little to moderate the temperature.
Despite this,
a strong southwesterly flow will produce Chinook conditions that drive temperatures,
in such places as Fort St. John, above freezing.


3-3 - Typical summer pattern

The mean circulation of the upper level winds over British Columbia is the result
of  two  semi-permanent  features.
Complicating this simple relationship
are the upper troughs of low pressure, upper ridges of high pressure and other weather
systems  that  move  along  with  the  upper  winds, altering  or  disrupting  the  normal 
pattern.


In the winter, these troughs are at their strongest and frequently create broad
areas of cloud with widespread precipitation.
The vertical lift and upper level cooling produced by the trough
will  intensify  any  preexisting  instability  in  the  atmosphere, and  some  of  the  worst
summertime thunderstorms are produced when such a trough moves over a region
that has already been destabilized by daytime heating.
If an upper trough crosses an
area where strong baroclinicity (temperature gradient) exists, it can set off a chain of
events that results in the development of a surface low pressure system and/or frontal
wave.
These  will  further  enhance  the  cloud  and  precipitation.
On average, 10 to 15 such storms will occur monthly during the winter.


Winter Storms

During the winter, low-pressure systems develop over the Pacific Ocean and move
toward the coast.
Most of these storms are either Gulf of Alaska lows, which tend to
remain  well  offshore, or  coastal  lows  which  approach  the  coast  before  developing 
rapidly.
The  front  sweeps  over  the  coast  giving
strong winds and widespread precipitation, especially along windward slopes.
The actual track of any individual storm can vary somewhat from those shown.


3-7 - Principal winter storm tracks are superimposed on a January 
                mean sea-level pressure pattern

Gulf of Alaska Lows

Fig.
The frontal system that accompanies the
low continues eastward onto the coast, bringing widespread cloud, precipitation, and
strong winds.
Behind the cold front, a period of strong northwesterly winds of 35 to
50 knots heralds the arrival of a colder, unstable airmass.


3-9 - A typical sea-level pressure pattern for a coastal low and 
              associated frontal system with wind pattern superimposed

Coastal lows usually intensify very rapidly just before they move over the British
Columbia coastal waters and can change from a very weak system into a severe storm
in as little as 9 hours.
On  the  coast, very  strong  winds  will
occur usually to the east and southeast of the low, just ahead of the associated frontal
system.
Winds here may reach southeasterly 70 knots with gusts to 100 knots in the
most severe storms.
Often, a second band of strong winds occur behind the cold front
in the area to the southwest of the low pressure centre.
Here, winds may range up to
65 knots from the west or northwest.
This results in a strong wind event for the interior.


The lows which follow this southern track can bring the strongest
winds and heavy rains to the Vancouver and Victoria areas.


3-10 - A typical winter pressure pattern shows a front crossing the 
                 coast with an indication of the winds near the front  


As the front moves inland, it tends to weaken due to subsidence to the lee of the
Coastal Mountains but still gives steady or intermittent precipitation that will vary
with the local temperatures

Winter High Pressure Systems

Surface high pressure systems are stronger in the winter than in the summer.
Strong outflow winds occur through the mainland 
                 inlets and near the mouth of the inlets.


3-12 - Strong winds funnel down the main-
land inlets often reaching speeds up to 60 knots

Fig.
3-13 - The end of an arctic outbreak 
occurs when the cold air is forced back 
inland by the arrival of warmer air being 
driven ahead of a Pacific storm

Inflow

The end of an arctic outbreak occurs when the cold air is forced back inland by the
arrival of warmer air being driven ahead of a Pacific storm.
In response to this pressure fall, the out-
flow  winds  will  gradually  ease  as  the  southeast  winds  strengthen  along  the  coast.

During this transition
time, from cold outflow to warm inflow, precipitation forecasting becomes very diffi-
cult.
Snow changes to rain but not without the chance of freezing rain.


When a frontal system moves across the coast the rising pressures over the offshore
waters induce an inflow wind through the coastal inlets.
❅
❅
❅
❅
❅
❅
❅
❅
❅
❅
❅
❅
❅
❅
❅
❅
BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 69

LAKP-British Columbia

69

Summer Weather

In  the  summer  months  (May  to  September)  the  frequency  and  severity  of  the
storms are much reduced.
This  northward  shift  causes  the  main
storm  track  to  shift  into  the  northern  Gulf  of  Alaska  and  across  northern  British
Columbia.
South  of  this  track, minor  frontal  systems, upper  troughs  and  thunder-
storms  produce  most  of  the  weather.
3-14 - A typical summer pressure pattern shows a front crossing the 
                 coast with an indication of the winds near the front

During the summer months, fronts tend to approach the coast from the northwest
across the Gulf of Alaska.
Southeast  winds  will  tend  to
increase along the coast just ahead of the front, then shift into the northwest with its
passage.
The effect of this trough is
to create a light, disorganized wind pattern as air flows toward the hottest locations.

Along  the  coast, light  winds  in  the  morning  are  replaced  by  strengthening  inflow
winds during the afternoon and evening in most inlets and valleys, as the cool coastal
air is drawn towards the interior.
Locations in BC with marked inflow winds are the
Strait of Juan de Fuca, Portland Inlet, Howe Sound, through the Hope area and up
the Fraser Canyon.


When it does, it normally lies over Georgia Strait causing subsi-
dent outflow winds from the interior which gives clear skies and light winds along the
coast.


After  a  few  days, the  thermal  trough  will  shift  back  into  the  interior  causing 
westerly  winds  of  20  to  30  knots  through  Juan  de  Fuca  Strait  and  into  southern
Georgia Strait.
Sea fog and stratus will accompany these winds and may extend as far
as Vancouver Airport and Boundary Bay.
BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 71

LAKP-British Columbia

71

Cold Lows

A cold low is a large, nearly circular area of the atmosphere in which temperatures
get colder toward the centre of the low, both at the surface and aloft.
The significance of cold lows is that they produce large areas
of cloud and precipitation, tend to persist in one location for prolonged periods of
time and are difficult to predict.


Along the
deformation  zone  to  the  northeast  of  the  cold  low, the  enhanced  vertical  lift  will
thicken the cloud cover and can produce widespread precipitation.
In many cases, the
deformation zone is where widespread and prolonged thunderstorm activity occurs.


For float plane operation, this symbol is used to denote areas where winds and 
significant waves can make landings and takeoffs dangerous or impossible.


Turbulence symbol
This standard symbol for turbulence is also used to indicate areas known for 
significant windshear, as well as potentially hazardous downdrafts.


Strong wind symbol (straight arrow)

This arrow is used to show areas prone to very strong winds and also indicates the 
typical direction of these winds.
Where these winds encounter changing topography 
(hills, valley bends, coastlines, islands), turbulence, although not always indicated, 
can be expected.


This symbol is similar to the strong wind symbol except that the winds are constricted 
or channeled by topography.  
In this case, winds in the narrow portion could be very 
strong while surrounding locations receive much lighter winds.


This standard symbol for snow shows areas prone to very heavy snowfall.


Thunderstorm symbol (half circle with anvil top)

This standard symbol for cumulonimbus (CB) cloud is used to denote areas 
prone to thunderstorm activity. 


South Coast

PORT HARDY

10,000 FT

7000 FT

5000 FT

3000 FT

2000 FT

1500 FT

1000 FT

600 FT

300 FT

0 SEA LEVEL

CAMPBELL RIVER

COMOX

PEMBERTON

TOFINO

NANAIMO

VANCOUVER

HOPE

ABBOTSFORD

VICTORIA

Map 4-2 - South Coast

For most of the year, the winds over the South Coast of BC are predominately from
the southwest to west.
During the summer, however, the Pacific High builds north-
ward over the offshore waters altering the winds to more of a north to northwest flow.

On the plus side, it is the bulk of Vancouver Island
that takes the brunt of these storm, ameliorating their effect on the inner waters and
mainland  areas.
The question for meteorologists and pilots then becomes not “Will we
get  precipitation?” but  “How  much  precipitation  will  we  get  and  what  type?”

Typically, a band of cloud and light precipitation over
the northern end of Vancouver Island may dissipate to just broken cloud and show-
ers in the south.


Rising
pressures ahead of this ridge will then give a period of brisk northwest winds to the
coast.
The strongest northwest winds are often reported where the air stream is fun-
nelled between the mountains of the mainland and Vancouver Island.
This effect is
particularly  noticeable  in  the  spring  months, as  the  fronts  still  retain  some  of  the
strength of winter storms.


Either track produces widespread cloud,
showers  and  cool  temperatures.
Although  not  frequent, thunderstorms  do  occur  along  the  coast  of  British
Columbia in the summer.
Air mass thunderstorms are the most common, tending to
develop during the late afternoon or evening and drifting eastward along the sides of
inlets or valleys.
On occasion, frontal thunderstorms will move into the coastal areas.
Many  of  the  mainland  valleys  experience  inflow  winds  in  the  summer  due  to 
the intense heating of the air over the Southern Interior.
However, as  the  thermal
trough is forced inland, these inflow winds will occur on a daily basis, drawing low
marine cloud into the inner coastal areas and even the mainland valleys.


As it does, a strong
north  to  south  temperature  gradient  is  established  that  will  provide  the  energy  for 
significant development of approaching weather systems.


Ahead of the approaching
low, a warm front will spread extensive, deep-layered cloud, steady precipitation and
strong  southeast  winds  across  the  area.
With  the  passage  of  the  warm  front, the 
precipitation becomes intermittent or ends completely, the lowest cloud layers break
up  and  the  winds  shift  to  a  moderate  to  strong  south  to  southwest  direction.
Finally, behind the cold front, strong gusty
northwest winds often prevail.
With the most active fronts, warm or cold, the winds
can briefly rise to 60 knots with gusts above 80 knots at locations over the northern
end of Vancouver Island.
Of the two, the southeast winds tend to be the strongest,
but they both can be very strong where channelling and coastal convergence occurs.


Eventually, moist, tropical air is picked up by the upper winds from near
the  tropics  and  carried  northeastward  onto  the  BC  coast.
The  result  is  extremely
heavy precipitation events where local rainfall amounts of 100 millimetres or more
can occur..


Photo 4-1 - Pineapple Express

BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 79

LAKP-British Columbia

79

Air mass thunderstorms occur most often during the winter, especially in the very
cold air that follows the passage of a cold front.
Winter  is  also  the  time  of “outflow  winds”.
These  clear  skies 
will then persist throughout the period of outflow winds.
The strong winds funnel down the mainland inlets often reaching speeds of 25 to
35 knots and occasionally rising as high as 50 knots.
When the strong winds flow out
from the mouths of the inlets they continue for some distance but gradually fan out
and weaken.
Extreme caution is advised when crossing coastal inlets during an out-
flow  situation  as  the  winds  could  increase  very  abruptly  in  a  narrow  band  near  the
mouth of the inlet.
One hint is to watch for the telltale ripple or wave pattern pro-
duced by these winds.


The end of an arctic outbreak occurs when the cold air is forced back inland by the
arrival of warmer air being driven ahead of an approaching storm.
With cold air along
the coast, the precipitation may start as snow but changes to either rain, or rain and
snow  mixed, as  temperatures  moderate.
Freezing  rain  can  also  occur  in  the  deeper
mainland valleys and inlets (including the eastern end of the valley) until the cold air
is fully scoured out by the approaching warmer air.


Westerly winds through Cowichan Valley often turn southward along the run-
way toward the valley and accelerate (15 knot wind becomes 25 knots).
There are large hills on Pender Island where all winds, except southerlies, flow over

hills resulting in downflow winds over the runway.


While protected from the stronger surface winds found over the
open water, it is susceptible to low-level mechanical turbulence and wind shear when
winds aloft are strong.
Most common during winter storm conditions, these hazards
can be severe.
Victoria airport, while somewhat protected from the common south-
easterly winds, is more exposed to southerly and southwesterly winds and can expe-
rience hazardous wind shear when significant winds aloft are from a conflicting direc-
tion.


In addition to the regular METARS, it is worthwhile for low flying traffic over the
water to check the marine wind reports from Trial Island just the south of Victoria,
Victoria Harbour, Discovery Island east of Victoria Harbour at the south end of Haro
Strait, Kelp Reef in Haro Strait east of Victoria Airport, Saturna Island near Active
Pass in the Gulf Islands, and Entrance Island north of Nanaimo.
Though not certi-
fied by Transport Canada for aviation weather, these sites, taken as a group, give a very
good indication of the surface winds over the water.


BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 82

82

CHAPTER FOUR 

Vancouver Area Including Pitt Meadows, Langley and Boundary Bay

HOWE 
SOUND

STRAIT OF 
GEORGIA

SQUAMISH
SQUAMISH
SQUAMISH

10,000 FT

7000 FT

5000 FT

3000 FT

2000 FT

1500 FT

1000 FT

600 FT

300 FT

0 SEA LEVEL

INDIAN ARM
INDIAN ARM
INDIAN ARM

VANCOUVER
VANCOUVER
VANCOUVER
VANCOUVER

SE

PITT LAKE

ALOUETTE
 LAKE

PITT MEADOWS
PITT MEADOWS
PITT MEADOWS

STAVE 
LAKE

LANGLEY
LANGLEY
LANGLEY

POINT ROBERTS

SE

BOUNDARY BAY

ABBOTSFORD
ABBOTSFORD
ABBOTSFORD

Map 4-4 - Vancouver Area Including Pitt Meadows, Langley and Boundary Bay

As most systems move over the south coast from the west or southwest (upper flow,
not the surface winds), the north side and east end of the Fraser Valley tend, due to
upslope, to get greater amounts of cloud and precipitation producing widespread areas
of low flying conditions.
Strong winds at Vancouver are usually from either the west or southeast with the
southeasterlies  tending  to  be  gusty  and  turbulent.
West  winds  can  reach  speeds
exceeding 40 knots on occasion but tend to be stable and relatively smooth.


Tidal currents in the Fraser River can be hazardous for landing seaplanes, especial-
ly  with  northwest  winds  that  oppose  the  current, producing  steep, choppy  waves.

Abbotsford to Hope 

LYTTON
LYTTON
LYTTON

TOLL 
TOLL 
TOLL 
BOOTH
BOOTH
BOOTH

SW

MERRITT

HOPE
HOPE
HOPE

COQUIHALLA 
COQUIHALLA 
COQUIHALLA 
HIGHWAY
HIGHWAY
HIGHWAY

ALLISON 
PASS

PRINCETON

PITT LAKE

ALOUETTE
 LAKE

STAVE 
LAKE

HARRISON
LAKE

LANGLEY
LANGLEY
LANGLEY

ABBOTSFORD
ABBOTSFORD
ABBOTSFORD

CHILLIWACK
CHILLIWACK
CHILLIWACK

10,000 FT

7000 FT

5000 FT

3000 FT

2000 FT

1500 FT

1000 FT

600 FT

300 FT

0 SEA LEVEL

COMMON FLIGHT 
ROUTES

Map 4-5 - Abbotsford to Hope 

BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 84

84

CHAPTER FOUR 

The worst weather in the Fraser Valley occurs from September to April and is usu-
ally associated with precipitation that brings on rapidly lowering ceilings and visibil-
ity.
During times of strong northwest winds over the Strait of Georgia, the winds will
curl into a strong westerly along the valley.
Very strong winds are common over Harrison Lake and Harrison River in summer.

Over the lake, the worst winds are northerly sea breezes during summer afternoons.

Turbulence
is  common  in  the  Hope  area  when  strong  inflow  or  outflow  winds  are  occurring.

At the mouth of Howe Sound, near Vancouver, channelling causes outflow winds
to increase dramatically.
The winds over the open waters of the southern
Strait of Georgia are also often in conflict.
When the outflow from Howe Sound is
strong and there is a strong southeasterly wind blowing along the Strait, these winds

BC-E  11/12/05  11:28 PM  Page 86

86

CHAPTER FOUR 

are meeting each other almost head on.
Add to this the fact that the upper winds just
off  the  surface  are  commonly  south  or  southwesterly  winds  aloft  producing  a  haz-
ardous condition with mechanical turbulence at lower levels and shear turbulence just
above  the  turbulent  boundary  level  winds, starting  anywhere  from  800  to  2,000  ft
MSL.
In the summer, thunderstorms are not infrequent in Howe Sound and tend to move
up the sound.
Strong inflow winds are common into Howe Sound to Squamish, often
exceeding 30 knots.
The valley from Whistler to Pemberton is notorious as one of the last to dry out and
clear  after  frontal  precipitation.
Southeasterly winds are the most significant along the strait and they tend to be
gusty.
Channelling and coastal convergence of the surface wind can be severe along
either side of Texada Island due to the height of the ridges.
Coastal convergence can
produce  winds  of  up  to  35  knots  in  the  summer  near  Qualicum  Beach.
BC-E  11/12/05  11:29 PM  Page 88

88

CHAPTER FOUR 

Powell River can be hazardous in southeast winds with lots of subsiding air near the
runway.
The lake can be especial-
ly bad in southeast winds, which swirl around a point of land on the southern end of
the lake.
Once again the unofficial wind reports from the marine bulletins are very useful
indicators of surface wind conditions.
The prevailing southeasterly winds in the winter tend to force low cloud onto the east
coast of Vancouver Island, often leaving the mainland half of the Strait less congested.


Winds over
the straits and at Port Hardy will be light in the morning and strengthen to north-
westerly 15 to 25 knots in the afternoon.
Alert Bay airport has an abrupt drop-off
near the northwest end of the runway that induces a downflow in strong southeast-
erly winds.


Winter  storms  tend  to  induce  strong  southeasterly  winds  in  the  straits  reaching
typical  values  of  25  to  45  knots  in  Johnstone  Strait  and  35  to  50  knots  in  Queen
Charlotte Strait.
When the upper flow is strong southwesterly (around 50 knots or greater) there is
a tendency for strong channelled winds to come out of Telegraph Bay (near Malcolm
Island).
Also  in  such  conditions  strong  rotor  activity  develops  in  Blind  Channel
(between Kelsey Bay and Chatham Point) resulting in swirling winds, sheets of water
lifting from the surface and even waterspouts.


BC-E  11/12/05  11:29 PM  Page 90

90

CHAPTER FOUR 

There is a typical weather regime change at Kelsey Bay with cloud and rain becom-
ing more common further north as wind patterns change.
In autumn and winter months, the
northern end of the island is often battered by extreme winds reaching 80 knots or
more.
Wind  speeds  over  the  water  are  available  from  the  Marine  Bulletins.
Near
Campbell River see Mudge Island (more indicative of winds at the water aerodrome
at Campbell Spit).
From  south  to  north  the  winds  in  Queen  Charlotte
Sound are found at Pulteney Point, Scarlett Point and Herbert Island.
Strong winds, low cloud, heavy precipitation and
fog banks combine to make this a treacherous route year round.
Near Gold River and Tahsis, inflow winds can make water very rough at the sea-
plane dock.
See the
marine report at Nootka for an indication of winds in Nootka Sound west of Gold
River.

BC-E  11/12/05  11:29 PM  Page 93

North Coast

LAKP-British Columbia

93

MASSET

SANDSPIT

PRINCE RUPERT

TERRACE

10,000 FT

7000 FT

5000 FT

3000 FT

2000 FT

1500 FT

1000 FT

600 FT

300 FT

0 SEA LEVEL

BELLA BELLA

Map 4-10 - North Coast

The  predominate  circulation  over  the  North  Coast  is  from  the  west.
Most of this can be attributed to the
fact that the northern storm track tends to lie over this area for much of the year and
the fact that there is no sheltering bulk of Vancouver Island to weaken the incoming
storms.
Winds will tend to increase along the coast just ahead of
the front and can be expected to reach values of 30 to 40 knots over some exposed
locations around the Queen Charlotte Islands.


This  produces  strong  northwest  winds  following  the
frontal passage.
The strongest northwesterly winds are often reported along the west
coast of the Queen Charlottes.


Although  not  frequent, thunderstorms  do  occur  over  the  inland  sections  of  the
North Coast in the summer.
Air mass thunderstorms are the most common, tend to
develop during the late afternoon or evening, and drift eastward along the sides of
inlets or valleys.
On rarer occasions, frontal thunderstorms will move into the coastal
areas.


Ahead
of the warm front, extensive, deep-layered cloud will give steady heavy precipitation
and strong southeast winds across the area.
With the passage of the warm front, the
precipitation  becomes  intermittent, the  lowest  cloud  layers  break  up  somewhat  but
the higher cloud layers will persist.
At the same time, strong southerly winds usually
persist.
Strong west to northwest
winds usually prevail, especially around the Queen Charlottes and Dixon Entrance.

With the most active fronts, warm or cold, the winds can briefly rise to 60 knots with
gusts above 80 knots at locations around the Queen Charlotte Islands.


Air mass thunderstorms occur most often during the winter in the very cold air that
follows the passage of a cold front.
Usually there has to be a trough
to get thunderstorms.


The strong winds funnel down the mainland
inlets  often  reaching  speeds  up  to  60  knots  and  occasionally  rising  as  high  as  100
knots.
Side tributaries from the main inlets also have strong winds and, where a major
side valley joins the main inlet, chaotic conditions are found.
When the strong winds
flow out from the mouths of the inlets, they continue for some distance but gradually
weaken as the flow is no longer confined.
Extreme caution is advised when crossing
coastal inlets during an outflow situation as the winds can increase very abruptly in a
narrow band near the mouth of the inlet.


After the initial surge of cold air, accompanied by a band of cloud
and  flurries, the  skies  will  clear  and  remain  so  throughout  the  period  of  outflow
winds.
The end of an arctic outbreak occurs when the cold air is forced back inland by the
arrival  of  warmer  air  being  driven  ahead  of  a  storm  approaching  from  the  Pacific
Ocean.
The  precipitation  with  the  system  frequently  starts  as  snow  but  changes  to
either rain, or rain and snow mixed, over the Queen Charlottes and along the coast
as  temperatures  moderate.
In  the  inlets; however, the  cold  outflow  winds  will 
gradually ease as the southeast winds strengthen along the coast.
Freezing rain can also occur in the inlets until the cold air is fully scoured out by the
approaching warmer air.


A strengthening afternoon inflow is common in the channels so that by late after-
noon the winds are frequently strong and the water too rough to allow floatplanes to
land at the head of inlets.


Local pilots suggest you stay
at least 5 miles clear of the Goose Bay area (Namu) and the big hill on the south side
of the mouth to Rivers Inlet when strong southeast winds are blowing (for an indica-
tor of wind strength check the report for Addenbroke).
Lee waves are present over
top of Rivers Inlet and flight near 500 feet will be extremely rough in windy conditions.


These winds are the best indicator of inflow/outflow conditions on
the central coast and are worth monitoring on a regular basis.
Outflow of cold air will
also occur ahead of approaching systems, and in the winter this creates the potential
for freezing rain.


Westerly winds tend to produce severe tur-
bulence over portions of Rivers Inlet, due to the steep bluffs on the west side of the
inlet.
In winter, Pacific low pressure systems can produce very strong winds, often
exceeding 50 knots.
When winds exceed 25 knots, moderate or greater turbulence can
be  expected  around  virtually  all  terrain.
Channelling  and  funnelling  can  produce
extreme winds in most inlets.
The severity of these winds should not be underesti-
mated.
Every winter on the north coast there are occasionally winds extreme enough
to induce swirls that can lift water frrom the surface.
Note, however, that even when
winds reach 35 knots or more in Chatham Sound (see Lucy Island), Seal Cove can
be relatively calm.


When the strong southeasterly or southerly winds are blowing, experienced pilots
flying between Prince Rupert and the central coast will avoid the inside routes such
as Grenville Channel, and take the longer route outside the islands to avoid the heavy
turbulence  induced  by  the  narrows  and  terrain.
The  strong  northeasterly  outflow
winds, common in the winter months, also cause significant turbulence near similar
terrain  features.
The  Portland  Inlet, just  north  of  Prince  Rupert, the  mouth  of  the
Skeena River and the Douglas Channel further south between Kitimat and the coast,
are particularly affected by outflow winds, often causing turbulence prohibitive of all
small aircraft flight.
In the summer strong northwesterly winds can cause moderate
to severe turbulence and rough sea conditions near Port Simpson just south of the
mouth of the Portland Inlet.
For indicators of the above conditions see the winds at
Grey Island for the mouth of Portland Inlet and Port Simpson, and at Holland Rock
for the mouth of the Skeena River.
The Nanakwa Shoal winds in the buoy report are
indicative of the winds in the Douglas Channel.


Winter systems also bring a lot of precipitation to the north coast.
The coastal
inlets and valleys are prone to low cloud during and after precipitation.
Inflow winds
tend to push this cloud up the valleys toward the mountains.
Outflow winds on the
other  hand  bring  drier  air, but  at  times  can  be  strong  enough  to  cause  significant
mechanical  turbulence  particularly  near  narrows  and  rough  terrain.
This can produce significant downslope winds and turbulence over east-
ern sections of the Bella Coola Valley.


Again, low cloud at
the southwest end of the route and mechanical turbulence in strong outflow winds,
are the most common problems.


The automatic weather station at Cathedral
Point in the Burke Channel is the best indicator of inflow/outflow winds along the
central coast.


FT

7000 FT

5000 FT

3000 FT

2000 FT

1500 FT

1000 FT

600 FT

300 FT

0 SEA LEVEL

BELLA BELLA
BELLA BELLA
BELLA BELLA

BURKE CHANNEL
BURKE CHANNEL
BURKE CHANNEL

BELLA COOLA
BELLA COOLA
BELLA COOLA

Map 4-14 - Bella Bella to Kitimat  (Douglas Channel)

When active storms are moving northward along the Central Coast, there may be
rotor turbulence on the east side of the valley, due to the higher southeasterly storm
winds interacting with the generally north to south terrain.
(For  an  indicator  of  inflow/outflow
winds  see  the  report  from  the  buoy  at  Nanakwa  Shoal.
BC-E  11/12/05  11:29 PM  Page 103

LAKP-British Columbia

103

This  channel  is  extremely  susceptible  to  freezing  rain  as  the  warm  air  ahead  of

approaching frontal systems overruns the cold air in the valley bottoms.


It is extreme-
ly susceptible to heavy snowfall ahead of an approaching frontal system, followed by
freezing rain as the warm air overruns the cold air in the valley bottoms.


Significant turbulence is observed with northwesterly winds to the north of Seal
Cove.
For  indicators  of  these  conditions  see  the  winds  at  Grey  Island  at  the  mouth  of
Portland Inlet.


Winter brings a seemingly endless procession of fronts
off the Pacific accompanied by severe winds, abundant precipitation, low cloud and

BC-E  11/12/05  11:29 PM  Page 105

LAKP-British Columbia

105

limited visibilities.
Hurricane force winds are a frequent feature of winter storms.
Moderate turbulence is often reported to the lee of Tow Hill, east of Masset, dur-
ing northwesterly or southeasterly winds exceeding 25 knots.
Thunderstorms (sum-
mer and winter) tend to move through Skidegate Channel on a regular basis, reduc-
ing visibility from unlimited to near zero (rain or snow) in a matter of a few minutes.


Langara Island and Rose Spit give
winds  for  the  northwest  and  northeast  corners  of  Graham  Island  respectively.
Kindakun Rocks gives winds on the exposed west
coast as does Cape St. James on the south tip of Moresby Island.


The region near Salvus can receive extremely heavy precipitation, due
to both convergence at the narrows and lift from the upslope terrain.


The  Douglas  Channel  south  of  Kitimat  as  well  as  the  valleys  south  and  west  of
Terrace are extremely susceptible to freezing rain as the warm air ahead of approach-
ing frontal systems overruns the cold air in the valley bottoms.
The strength of the
inflow/outflow  winds  can  be  monitored  by  checking  the  report  from  the  buoy  at
Nanakwa Shoal.


When the flow aloft is southwesterly, it
is common to see Pacific frontal systems produce little or no precipitation over this
area.
Only when the upper flow turns to the south does significant precipitation pen-
etrate  these  valleys.
The  annual  precipitation  is  almost  equally  split  among  the
months – weather systems providing the precipitation in the winter and convection
in the summer.


BC-E  11/12/05  11:29 PM  Page 108

108

CHAPTER FOUR 

(a) Summer

Summers in the Southwest Interior tend to be sunny and hot as the Pacific Ridge
pushes  the  main  storm  track  north  of  the  area.
The cloud cover will develop noticeable breaks and precipitation, if any, will be light.

For the most part the summer is dry and hot with afternoon temperatures reaching
into the mid-to-upper 30 degree Celsius range.
At this time of
the year, the upper winds are usually light so that non-convective turbulence is at a
minimum.


While the precipitation is usually light, areas of
upslope flow will see larger amounts.


The  most  active  thunderstorms  tend  to  occur  when  some  sort  of  front  of  upper
trough moves across the interior, producing a band of afternoon or evening thunder-
showers.
These thunderstorms often persist well into the night.
Over most regions,
the predominant types are air mass and nocturnal thunderstorms and, when they do
occur, they generally move along the valleys.
The mountainous terrain hinders the full
development of thunderstorms so that severe weather is uncommon.
When it does, it
usually consists of severe lightning, large hail and downburst winds.
While thunder-
storms  can  occur  at  anytime  during  the  summer, the  main  period  is  from  June  to
August.


As a front moves inland, it will weaken due to subsidence; how-
ever, usually sufficient moisture will persist to give some precipitation.
It is worth noting here that the snow level is usually found
500 to 1,000 feet below the freezing level.
Fortunately, freezing  precipitation  is
rare; however, icing in this cloud can be significant.


This cloud
will  produce  some  precipitation, but  only  light  snow, in  areas  where  the  moisture 
supply has been increased.
Valley cloud will only move if strong winds develop in the
valley, or it will dissipate if the major moisture sources freeze over.
With  temperatures  that  are 
relatively warm, they contain a significant percentage of supercooled water droplets
resulting in SLD icing.
In addition, these larger droplets have been known to settle
out of the cloud, producing freezing drizzle just below the cloud base.


Depending on
the strength of the arctic front, winds can shift abruptly into the northwest with the
passage of the front and be gusty for several hours.
Arctic air over the interior offers little problems other than the temperature.
These clouds, if there is a significant
difference between the air temperature and the water temperature, will be turbulent,
contain  icing  and  produce  local  heavy  snow  showers.
At the same time, the combination of
the upper flow and the channelled winds in the valleys will produce wind shears near
the top of the valley.


Despite frequent reports of strong winds at Lytton, turbulence is seldom encoun-
tered south of Boston Bar.
However, during times of strong southerly winds (30 knots
or  greater)  severe  turbulence  should  be  expected  near  Lady  Franklin  Rock  (across
from  the Yale Tunnel).
North  of  Boston  Bar, pilots  have, despite  wind  gusts  to  60
knots, noticed little turbulence.
The area around the Lytton airport can be turbulent
at times due to the splitting of the strong winds into the Fraser and Thompson River
valleys.


Like the southern part of the Fraser Canyon, strong winds will
occur in the summer giving localized areas of turbulence.


The route west of the Allison Pass is part of a very wet ups-
lope regime, and is an area known to be slow to dry and become clear of low cloud
after precipitation.


Visibility  falls
rapidly along this route once steady precipitation begins.
Precipitation results in a very rapid low-
ering of ceilings and visibility.
Also when
strong southerly winds aloft are occurring, expect moderate occasional severe turbu-
lence at 6,000 to 7,000 feet near Yahk Mountain and Zopkios Ridge.


This more northerly route is a popular route to fly as it often avoids the poor con-
ditions and strong winds occurring in the Fraser Canyon.
Occasionally  in  summer, strong  thunderstorms  can  be  encoun-
tered, and in fall fog can be a problem near the lakes.


Precipitation generally brings low cloud all along the route.
Kamloops
wind strength and direction give an indication as to which end of the lake the cloud
will be heavier.
When the
surface winds are strong the area around Keremeos is prone to mechanical turbulence
at lower levels.


Winds and temperatures aloft have a strong effect on flying conditions in the valley.

Westerly to southwesterly winds aloft is common, and when strong, cause lee wave

GRAND FORKS

TRAIL

BC-E  11/12/05  11:29 PM  Page 117

LAKP-British Columbia

117

turbulence and downdrafts on the west side of the valley.
Another effect common to many BC valleys is that of temperature inversion.
The area is generally dry but after precipitation low cloud will often remain
in the upper valley passes longer than at Kamloops (the only local METAR).
With
strong winds at 3 and 6 thousand feet expect mechanical turbulence in the passes.
During the summer months, thunderstorms tend to intensify near Shuswap Lake,

and many feel that the lightning capital of BC is the area just east of the lake.


Any  system  that
crosses the Coast Mountains on an eastward track will undergo further upslope lift in
this area, resulting in additional precipitation.
As it does, the cloud band will thicken and the precipitation becomes
heavier and more widespread along the upslope areas.
The majority of precipitation over this area during the summer is convective.
For
the most part, the mountainous terrain hinders the development of severe thunder-
storms.
Instead, airmass  and  nocturnal  thunderstorms  develop  and  move  along  the
valleys.
Severe convective weather is most often the result of storms moving north-
eastward  out  of  Washington  and  Idaho.
Even  these  storms  usually  produce  severe
lightning, large  hail  and  downburst  winds.
While thunderstorms can occur at anytime during the
spring and summer, the main period is from June to August.


Frontal 
systems are stronger and wetter resulting in widespread cloudiness and precipitation.

For the most part, the precipitation will fall as snow resulting in extensive low ceil-
ings and visibility.
Valley  cloud  will  only  move  if  strong  winds  develop 
in the valley or it will dissipate if the major moisture sources freeze over.
Depending  on  the
strength of the arctic front, winds can shift abruptly into the east with the passage of
the front and be gusty for several hours.
BC-E  11/12/05  11:30 PM  Page 120

120

CHAPTER FOUR 

Arctic air offers little problems other than the temperature.
These clouds, if there is a significant difference between the air temperature
and the water temperature, will be turbulent, contain significant icing and produce
local  snow  showers.
From there
it  follows  Highway  3  past  Christina  Lake, rising  another  2,000  feet  through  yet
another  upslope  region  with  the  usual  increase  in  precipitation  and  cloud, before
dropping  into  the  Columbia  River  valley  west  of  the  Arrow  Dam  and  Castlegar.

This route is seldom a problem during the peak of summer except for thunderstorm
activity.
The area is hot and dry with little weather other than thunderstorms.
These
thunderstorms usually originate in Washington State and move northwards along the
valleys during the afternoon and evening.
but, on occa-
sion, a few nocturnal thunderstorms will last into the early morning.


Upslope  lift  east  of  the
Okanagan Valley and again just west of Grand Forks causes increased precipitation
and  cloud  and, when  applicable, aggravates  convective  build-ups.
The Arrow Dam where the Columbia River valley narrows is a known area of turbu-
lence  in  strong  winds.
In addition to low cloud, strong winds with wind shear are common.


With all moun-
tain routes clouds and winds can be a problem.
Low-level winds can be strong in the
Kootenay Bay area due to converging winds where the valleys come together.
Winds
here  and  at  Nelson  tend  to  be  worse  in  a  southwest  flow.
Nelson  airport  itself  is
known  to  have  crosswinds  on  a  regular  basis.
The Moyie River Valley
between Yahk and Moyie Lake receives more precipitation than other areas, even dur-
ing  the  summer.
SEA LEVEL

CRANBROOK
CRANBROOK
CRANBROOK

SPARWOOD
SPARWOOD
SPARWOOD

BULL
RIVER

MOYIE
LAKE

FERNIE
FERNIE
FERNIE

CRESTON

RYANRYANRYAN

YAHKYAHKYAHK

COMMON FLIGHT 
ROUTES

ELKOELKOELKO

Map 4-28 - Cranbrook and eastwards through the Crowsnest Pass

At the Cranbrook airport itself, although winds are not very strong, the prevailing
westerly wind is across the runway.
The route up the Elk Valley to Sparwood and on to Blairmore (in Alberta) is well
known for its strong winds (up to 80 knots) and turbulence.
Strong outflow winds are common out of the Bull
River valley.


At Three Valley Gap, the narrow confluence
of  valleys  channels  both  wind  and  low  cloud  and  is  the  usual  problem  point  when
conditions are marginal.
When winds are strong pilots should assume that there will
be  significant  mechanical  turbulence  in  this  area.
The  upslope  lift  encountered  by
weather system approaching from the southwest or west increases the instability and
precipitation.
Surface  winds  at  Revelstoke
can be very strong following an arctic front but, in general, are not usually a hazard to
aviation.
Revelstoke to Golden to Banff

BLAEBERRY PASS

COMMON FLIGHT 
ROUTES

DONALD
DONALD
DONALD

SHUSWAP LAKE

REVELSTOKE
REVELSTOKE
REVELSTOKE

ROGERS PASS

KATABATIC WINDS
KICKING HORSE 
PASS

3 VALLEY GAP

GOLDEN
GOLDEN
GOLDEN

10,000
It is rarely open during times of precipitation and should not be attempted when
conditions are deteriorating rapidly from the west (i.e. a front moving in).


While
winds are generally not a major concern between Golden and Kicking Horse Pass,
local funnelled winds can provide some turbulence.
When the winds are strong,
the worst turbulence, often moderate or greater, is usually found to the east of Banff,
and can make an otherwise clear day unflyable.
A pressure difference on either side of the Rockies usually indi-
cates winds and associated turbulence in the pass and vicinity.


Infrequent strong winds do not usually produce significant turbulence due to the
wide, linear valley, except where valleys merge with the Trench from the side.
With
strong  winds  aloft  (west  to  southwest), occasionally  lee  wave  turbulence  will  affect
flights into and out of Cranbrook.


The
airport at Cranbrook is on a hill above the town and is often subject to crosswinds
from the west.
Beside the usual cloud problems
associated  with  Rocky  Mountain  passes, this  route  has  the  potential  for  very  haz-
ardous wind and turbulence conditions.
West of this location, winds and turbulence diminish rapidly
except for extreme katabatic winds on sunny summer evenings.
With the effects of
channelling and rugged terrain on valley winds and the katabatic winds off the ice
fields  and  glaciers, wind  patterns  can  be  very  chaotic.
The  only  way  to  avoid  these
conditions is to fly before 10am or after 5pm when surface winds are light or at much
higher altitudes when ceilings allow it.
Winds along
the  Columbia  River  are  almost  always  much  stronger  than  those  further  south  at
Golden.
(a) Summer

Like the rest of BC, summer is the benign season where the weather is strongly
influenced by the position of the main storm track.
During the early part of summer
and in the fall, the storm track tends to lie over the Central Interior.
This exposes this
area to the travelling frontal systems sweeping across the area giving frequent cloudi-
ness and precipitation.


This  northward  shift  causes  the  main
storm  track  to  shift  into  the  northern  Gulf  of  Alaska  and  across  northern  British
Columbia, or even into the Yukon.
South of this track, minor frontal systems, upper
troughs and thunderstorms produce most of the weather.
In  the  Central  Interior  of  British  Columbia  and  the  northern  section  of  British
Columbia, the plateau type terrain allows the thunderstorms to reach full intensity.

While  air  mass  thunderstorms  still  remain  the  predominate  type, frontal  thunder-
storms  and  nocturnal  thunderstorms  are  common.
The  typical  scenario  would  see 
the beginning of thunderstorm activity early in the afternoon and for it to dissipate
in the evening.
Most often the thunderstorms move towards the northeast and, given
the right conditions, their intensity can reach the severe level.
The 
normal thunderstorm season for both areas is June to August.


As such, steady precipitation is to be expected whose type will vary with the
local temperatures.
Depending on the strength of the arctic front, winds can shift abruptly into
the northwest to northeast with the passage of the front and be gusty for several hours 

Arctic air over the interior offers little problem, other than the temperature.
These clouds, if there is a significant dif-
ference  between  the  air  temperature  and  the  water  temperature, will  be  turbulent,
contain icing and produce local snow showers.
BC-E  11/12/05  11:30 PM  Page 138

138

CHAPTER FOUR 

VANDERHOOF

PRINCE
GEORGE

Williams Lake - Alexis Creek – Puntzi Mountain – Anahim Lake 

ANAHIM LAKE
ANAHIM LAKE
ANAHIM LAKE

CHARLOTTE LAKE
CHARLOTTE LAKE
CHARLOTTE LAKE

PUNTZI
PUNTZI
PUNTZI
MOUNTAIN
MOUNTAIN
MOUNTAIN

KLEENA KLEENE
KLEENA KLEENE
KLEENA KLEENE

QUESNEL
QUESNEL
QUESNEL

VERY DRY
EXECPT IN EAST
OR NORTHEAST WIND

TATLA LAKE
TATLA LAKE
TATLA LAKE

ALEXIS CREEK
ALEXIS CREEK
ALEXIS CREEK

CHILKO LAKE
CHILKO LAKE
CHILKO LAKE

RISKE CREEK
RISKE CREEK
RISKE CREEK

WILLIAMS LAKE
WILLIAMS LAKE
WILLIAMS LAKE


Generally, weather  systems  give  more  precipitation  east  of  the  Fraser  River.

Thunderstorms are more frequent, especially in the vicinity and east of the Fraser River.

In the winter severe lee wave turbu-
lence  to  the  east  of  the  Coast  Mountains  is  common  with  very  strong  westerly  or

BC-E  11/12/05  11:30 PM  Page 139

LAKP-British Columbia

139

southwesterly  winds  aloft.
Williams Lake to Quesnel

ANAHIM LAKE
ANAHIM LAKE
ANAHIM LAKE

CHARLOTTE LAKE
CHARLOTTE LAKE
CHARLOTTE LAKE

PUNTZI
PUNTZI
PUNTZI
MOUNTAIN
MOUNTAIN
MOUNTAIN

KLEENA KLEENE
KLEENA KLEENE
KLEENA KLEENE

QUESNEL
QUESNEL
QUESNEL

VERY DRY
EXECPT IN EAST
OR NORTHEAST WIND

TATLA LAKE
TATLA LAKE
TATLA LAKE

ALEXIS CREEK
ALEXIS CREEK
ALEXIS CREEK

CHILKO LAKE
CHILKO LAKE
CHILKO LAKE

RISKE CREEK
RISKE CREEK
RISKE CREEK

WILLIAMS LAKE
WILLIAMS LAKE
WILLIAMS LAKE

COMMON FLIGHT 
ROUTES

10,000 FT

7000 FT

5000 FT

3000 FT

2000 FT

1500 FT

1000 FT

600 FT

300 FT

0 SEA LEVEL

Map 4-40 - Williams Lake to Quesnel

The Fraser River valley from Williams Lake to Quesnel is relatively broad and the
grade is gradual.
Whenever the arc-
tic front oscillates back and forth through the area, the front is accompanied by freez-
ing  drizzle, low  cloud, poor  visibility  in  snow, fog  and  wind  shear.
The  Cariboo-
Central Interior is not prone to winds.
However, the Fraser River Valley can be windy,
particularly southerly winds, which can exceed 40 knots at low levels, in autumn and
winter.
Although they are strong and generate high wind shear values, these winds do
not generally produce significant turbulence in the Valley.


This  area  is  well  known  for  its  summer  thunder-
storm activity with the accompanying gusty winds and turbulence.


The emissions from the mill stacks often
QUESNEL LAKE
give a visual representation of the low-level vertical wind pattern.


Strongest winds at the airport tend to be from the south.
Light northerly winds at the
surface often occur in conjunction with strong southerly winds aloft, say at 800 feet.

Both routes from Kamloops to Vavenby can see some low cloud especially during
and  after  precipitation.
North of Blue
River, strong  winds  aloft  (6  to  12  thousand  feet)  out  of  the  west  or  southwest  can
cause considerable turbulence in the valley.


Severe turbulence often results when strong winds aloft cross the mountains
from  the  southwest.
In winter low cloud and precipitation move through with frontal disturbances, dry-
ing slowly behind them.
Winds and
turbulence  are  generally  light  along  this  route.
Low  cloud  and  fog  are  commonly
encountered along the Parsnip River Valley, especially in the fall and spring and often
in association with frontal precipitation.


In summer, the Pine Pass
area is also prone to thunderstorm activity.
As with other locations just east of the
Rockies, lee wave turbulence is to be expected in the Chetwynd area when there is a
strong southwesterly flow aloft

Thunderstorms often form along the foothills in summer months along a line just
east of Chetwynd.
These convective lines tend to remain relatively stationary while
developing in the early afternoon, then tend to begin to move in the direction of the
upper level (approximately FL180) winds late in the day.


Turbulence  in  this  region  is  worst  in  north  to  south  oriented  valleys, when  the
winds are blowing across the mountains from west to east.
These winds tend to be
strongest in spring and autumn, with associated mechanical turbulence usually below
1,000 feet AGL.

BC-E  11/12/05  11:31 PM  
Large thunderstorms with strong
winds and hail occur, with the occasional report of a funnel cloud or tornado.


Strong westerly winds will

BC-E  11/12/05  11:31 PM  
In addition, gusty westerly
crosswinds often make landings tricky at Burns Lake.

Weather  can  change  very  quickly  as  cloud  invades  through  the  valley  at Telkwa.
Precipitation and westerly winds are more frequent at Telkwa and over the town than
at the Smithers Airport.
When westbound through the Telkwa Pass with low cloud or freezing levels, sud-
den snow squalls or rapidly lowering cloud can reduce ceiling and visibility to near
zero almost instantly.
BC-E  11/12/05  11:31 PM  Page 150

150

CHAPTER FOUR 

In summer, strong inflow winds can combine with Katabatic winds from the gla-
ciers to cause significant mechanical turbulence.
Thus there is a significant change in the precipitation regime along the Skeena
River.
Intrusions  of  low  cloud  and  fog  with
inflow winds are the main weather hazard and, although more frequent in winter, can
occur throughout the year.
When winds aloft at 6,000 feet exceed 30 knots, moderate turbulence is common
throughout the region.
Rounding Copper Mountain at the confluence of the Copper
(Zymoetz) and Skeena Rivers, there is often a wall of wind giving sudden and unex-
pected turbulence.
This usually occurs when strong inflow winds are experienced at
the Terrace Airport.


If even a scattered layer of low cloud below
700 feet is reported at the Terrace Airport when they are reporting a light southerly
wind, the Kalum River Valley is likely socked in up to Kitsumkalum Lake.
When
there  are  strong  inflow  or  outflow  winds, turbulence  should  be  expected, especially
between American Creek and Meziadin,

Weather observation at Stewart should be examined for an idea of conditions near

Meziadin.


The  valley  north  of  Bell  1  to, and
including the Nigunsaw Pass, is in a very heavy snowfall belt.
In winter it has been
know to receive some of the heaviest snowfalls in northwest BC.


Any precipitation usually
closes these northern valley routes.


If there is low cloud at Ketchikan along with a
westerly wind component, both routes are likely closed.


With  systems
tracking  in  from  the  west  and  southwest, heavier  precipitation  and  more  frequent
cloud are generally experienced in the upslope area on the western side of the Cassiar
Mountains.
ing from the Gulf of Alaska will likely cause precipitation in the mountains and close
the route.


Strong west or south-
west winds can generate significant turbulence to the lee of the Coast Mountains and
higher interior terrain.


These large lakes
are subject to strong winds and rough surface conditions.


At these times, widespread low
ceilings and prolonged precipitation will occur and at times will last for twenty-four
hours or more.


This area is also marked by frequent thunderstorms which, due to the plateau type
of terrain, often reach their full intensity.
While airmass thunderstorms still remain
the predominant type, frontal thunderstorms and nocturnal thunderstorms are com-
mon.
The typical scenario would see the beginning of thunderstorm activity early in
the afternoon and for it to persist well into the night.
Most often the thunderstorms
move toward the northeast and, given the right conditions, their intensity can reach
the severe level.
The normal thunderstorm season for both areas is June to August.


(Most common in spring and summer months, this feature
occurs on clear nights following strong, gusty winds in the previous afternoon.)
As
the  sun  sets, a  low-level  temperature  inversion  forms.
The  strong  winds  remain 
several hundred feet off the ground while surface winds become calm.
In some cases,
the winds just above the ground can be stronger than the afternoon gusts.
They will; however, still give steady or
intermittent precipitation whose type will vary depending upon local temperatures.

Accumulation of precipitation is usually light in comparison to the coast.
Patchy freezing rain or
drizzle occurs on occasion during the winter months, usually developing east of the
mountains, especially near the arctic front when it lies along the Continental Divide.


Depending  on  the  strength  of  the  arctic
front, winds can shift abruptly to the northwest following the frontal passage and be
gusty for several hours.
This, coupled with local snowfalls, can produce blizzard con-
ditions.
When an arctic high-pressure system lies to the east of the Rockies, an
intense shear zone can develop as strong southwesterlies aloft blow over surface based
easterly winds.
Across the shear zone there is usually a very sharp temperature inver-
sion.
In  some  cases, surface  temperatures  can  be  twenty  degrees  colder  than  those
found several hundred feet above ground.
In such cases, even in clear air, frost can
form  on  the  plane, particularly  on  the  cockpit  windows, while  ascending  into  the
warmer air aloft.
Some of the sharpest low level temperature inversions occur
over Fort Nelson in winter, sometimes as much as a 30 degree change in less than one
thousand feet.
Despite  this, the  ride  will  often  be  very
rough, up to approximately 8,000 feet, if winds across the mountains exceed 25 knots.

This section is much more prone to low cloud
when there is a low-level flow from the northeast quadrant, as these winds cause oro-
graphic lift along the upslope terrain.
Many pilots
choose this route when the surface winds are from the north to east quadrant, to avoid
the conditions of upslope flow further west.


It also tends to have lighter
winds than the surrounding region.
However, expect moderate turbulence in the area
when the airport reports strong westerly winds.


It then winds its way through the hills over two lower
passes at about 3,600 feet, before joining the Liard River Valley.


Abbotsford
Wind Frequency by Direction
Summer
N

Abbotsford
Wind Frequency by Direction
Winter
N

NW

25%

20%

NE

NW

15%

10%

5%

NE

35%

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%
5%

W

E

W

E

SW

S

SE


The winter winds show a strong bias to blowing either from the northeast to east,
or from the south to southwest.
Northeast winds are very common and can be attrib-
uted to a cool katabatic flow that comes out from the eastern end of the Fraser Valley
and curls around Sumas Mountain.
Typically, this wind will only be in the 5 to 10
knots range except in the case of very strong outflow conditions.
If it is snowing or
there is dry snow on the ground, the winds will produce blizzard-like conditions over
the Sumas Prairie with the main core of strong winds passing just to the southeast of
the airport.
During these events, the winds will typically be northeasterly 10 to 20
knots at the airport.
When low pressure systems or fronts approach the South Coast,
there is a tendency for these winds to take on a more easterly direction and increase
in strength.
The south-southwest winds most often occur behind frontal systems as
they move eastward into the interior.
The summer winds show the same bias for northeast and southwest direction as the
winter winds.
This sea breeze tends
to  die  down  in  the  mid-evening  and  by  midnight  the  northeasterly  katabatic  wind
will have re-asserted itself.
Even the passage of a summer front will show little change
in the bias to certain wind directions.
Castlegar
Wind Frequency by Direction
Summer
N

Castlegar
Wind Frequency by Direction
Winter
N

NW

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

NE

NW

20%

15%

NE

10%

5%

W

E

W

E

SW

SE

SW

S


%Calm 29.0

The  winds  at  Castlegar  show  strong  channelling  by  the  terrain, both  during  the
summer and winter.
From the graphs, it is evident that the predominant winds are
either from the north or south, about 20 percent of the time for each direction.
The
wind can alter slightly in northwest or southeast directions, with the southeast wind
more  common  in  the  winter  as  it  moves  up  the  Columbia  River  Valley.
It is worth noting that calm winds occur on an average of 28 per-
cent of the time, summer and winter.


Cranbrook
Wind Frequency by Direction
Summer
N

Cranbrook
Wind Frequency by Direction
Winter
N

NW

20%

15%

10%

5%

NE

NW

15%

NE

10%

5%

W

E

W

E

SW

SE

SW

S


%Calm 46.3

BC-E  11/12/05  11:32 PM  Page 173

LAKP-British Columbia

173

Cranbrook is not a windy location.
During the winter months it is calm almost 46
percent  of  the  time  and  the  winds  are  less  than  10  knots  almost  90  percent  of  the
time.
When the wind does blow it has a strong preference for directions ranging from
southeast to west.
Winds from the south to west occur most often a few hours ahead
and behind frontal systems as they move across the interior.
The southeast wind, out
of the Rocky Mountain Trench, is often a result of cold air invading from Alberta.

Cranbrook is slightly windier in the summer, mainly due to local convection, but
even so it is calm 27 percent of the time.
Like winter, it has a preference for winds
from southeast to west.
These winds tend to be largely a product of local pressure dif-
ferences, as well as the movement of frontal systems through the area.


During the winter, arctic air pools in the valley and can hold temperatures at
subzero values long after the higher terrain warms up.
The sharp inversions these cold
pools form are a favourite haunt for widespread low stratus, fog and freezing drizzle.


Even when the weather is nice, thunderstorms are a frequent visitor.


On the plus side, Fort Nelson is not a windy airport.
While the winds can blow
from  almost  any  direction, about  70  percent  of  the  time  they  remain  at  below 
10 knots.


BC-E  11/12/05  11:32 PM  Page 175

LAKP-British Columbia

175

Fort Nelson
Wind Frequency by Direction
Summer
N

Fort Nelson
Wind Frequency by Direction
Winter
N

NW

20%

15%

10%

5%

NE

NW

20%

15%

NE

10%

5%

W

E

W

E

SW

SE

SW

S

%Calm 20

S

SE

%Calm 41


The winds of summer show three distinctive axes.
The northerly winds occur quite
frequently  when  a  cold  front  moves  southward  through  Alberta.
The most common wind, the southwesterly, is a ‘chinook-type’ flow.
Downslope off
the  Rockies, these  winds  tend  to  be  strong, gusty  and  warm.
The wind that offers the greatest problem is the east
or southeast wind.
This wind is upslope and often brings with it widespread low ceil-
ings and visibility in precipitation and mist.


Fort St. John
Wind Frequency by Direction
Summer
N

Fort St. John
Wind Frequency by Direction
Winter
N

NW

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

NE

NW

30%

25%

NE

20%

15%

10%

5%

W

E

W

E

SW

S

SE


%Calm 9.0

S

BC-E  11/12/05  11:32 PM  Page 177

LAKP-British Columbia

177

The winter winds show a stronger preference for the cold northerlies, usually associ-
ated with the arctic front.
Another common wind is the warm southwesterlies.
The
result is that the entire area is subject to wide swings in temperature.
Meanwhile, the east
or southeast winds continue to be a problem in that there is a river to the southeast
of the airport that remains open most winters.
Fog banks form over this water and the
wind carries it into the airport.


Kamloops
Wind Frequency by Direction
Summer
N

Kamloops
Wind Frequency by Direction
Winter
N

NW

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

NE

NW

35%

30%

25%

NE

20%

15%

10%
5%

W
W

E
E

W

E

SW

SE

SW


The winds at Kamloops Airport show the effects of the east to west orientation of
the Thompson River Valley.
During the winter months, the wind is easterly almost
35 percent of the time or calm 26 percent of the time.
These easterly winds are a prod-
uct of katabatic winds that develop along the local slopes most nights, converge in the
valley bottom and flow towards Kamloops Lake.
Normally these winds are only 5 to
10 knots, but can increase ahead of approaching frontal systems or with very strong
drainage of arctic air towards the coast.
Westerly winds occur less often and tend to
be strong and gusty in the wake of an arctic front.


The terrain continues to influence the direction in the summer but convection gives
a larger variation in wind direction.
As in winter, the valley has a preference for an
easterly drainage wind overnight and during the morning.
In the afternoon, convection
begins to mix the upper winds down to the surface causing the direction of the wind
to  shift  to  westerly.
Also, frontal  systems  which  move  across  the  interior  at 
regular intervals, bring wind shifts from east to west with their passage.
Some of the
strongest westerly winds will occur in this case.
It is worth noting that, on occasion,
strong subsidence winds aloft are brought down to the surface as south-to-southwest
(190-230 degrees true) winds.
These winds are not only quite strong but definitely
abrupt in their onset.


With such marked terrain influence, it should come as no surprise that most of the
time the winds are either northerly or southerly.

 
 
BC-E  11/12/05  11:32 PM  Page 181

LAKP-British Columbia

181

In the summer months, the winds are predominately thermally driven and result in
a frequency distribution that is split between north and south.
The  strong
convection produced by this heating eventually carries the predominately southerly
winds  aloft  to  the  surface, resulting  in  strong  southerly  winds  that  persist  into  the
evening.
Air begins to drain towards this low resulting in norther-
ly winds that will persist into the morning.
On the other hand, if the upper winds are
not southerly or very light, a northerly wind will persist for the entire day.


Penticton
Wind Frequency by Direction
Summer
N

40%

Penticton
Wind Frequency by Direction
Winter
N

NW

30%

NE

NW

20%

10%

40%

30%

NE

20%

10%

W

E

W

E

SW

SE

SW

S

%Calm 20

S

SE


%Calm 17

The  winter  wind  pattern  is  largely  driven  by  pressure  gradient.
Strong southerly winds develop through the
southern  valleys  ahead  of  these  systems, especially  the  trailing  cold  fronts, then
change to a northerly flow in its wake.
It should be noted that this wind change will
not occur if the pressures to the north of the airport remain lower than those to the
south.
Northerly  winds  also  occur  when  cold  arctic  air  spreads  into  the  Southern
Interior and drains towards the coast and Washington.


BC-E  11/12/05  11:32 PM  Page 183

LAKP-British Columbia

183

Like most other BC airports, the season of the year has a strong influence on the
wind.
In the summer, the most frequent winds tend to be easterlies that occur just
ahead of frontal systems and northwesterlies that occur with its passage.
This induces a sea breeze
that begins as a northwesterly wind over Northern Queen Charolette Strait in the late
afternoon, spreads southward and then slackens to light winds near midnight.


Port Hardy
Wind Frequency by Direction
Summer
N

40%

Port Hardy
Wind Frequency by Direction
Winter
N

NW

30%

NE

NW

20%

10%

40%

30%

NE

20%

10%

W

E

W

E

SW

SE

SW

S


%Calm 14

Winter at Port Hardy is a wet, windy time of year.
Strong lows and frontal systems
move onto the North Coast, generating frequent east to southeast winds up Queen
Charlotte Strait and over the airport.
While the airport can experience periods when
the winds are light or calm, it is worth noting that over 25 percent of the time in the
winter  the  winds  are  in  excess  of  10  knots.
Very  frequently, the  winds  are  much
stronger over Queen Charlotte Strait and these winds often move onto the airport a
few hours ahead of an approaching frontal system.


On the plus side, when the strong southeast winds are blowing the airport tends
to remain just above the IFR category.


The  weather  here  is
extremely variable, as the major storm tracks off the Pacific prefer to lie across this
area.
Cloudy skies and precipitation tend to be common, yet in the summer the days
can  be  hot  and  sunny  with  the  strongest  thunderstorms  anywhere  in  the  province.

BC-E  11/12/05  11:32 PM  Page 185

LAKP-British Columbia

185

The wind pattern is fairly uniform across the entire year.
Southerly winds tend to

develop ahead of weather systems and then become northerly  in their wake.


Prince George
Wind Frequency by Direction
Summer
N

Prince George
Wind Frequency by Direction
Winter
N

NW

40

%

30

%

20

%

10

%

NE

NW

NE


These conditions tend to be episodic in that poor
weather will redevelop night after night, until the wind or the airmass changes.


The winds at Prince Rupert are for the most part light.
Even in the winter months
when vigourous weather systems sweep into the North Coast, the airport winds are
less than 10 knots 75 percent of the time.

 
 

BC-E  11/12/05  11:32 PM  Page 187

LAKP-British Columbia

187

The wind patterns at Prince Rupert show a strong seasonal variation.
In the sum-
mer months, two predominate wind directions prevail.
The marked southeast wind
occurs  ahead  of  approaching  weather  systems.
The  west  winds  occurs  behind  the
fronts and with sea breezes.


Prince Rupert
Wind Frequency by Direction
Summer
N

40%

Prince Rupert
Wind Frequency by Direction
Winter
N

40%

NW

30%

NE

NW

30%

NE

20%

10%

20%

10%

W

E

W

E

SW

SE

SW

SE

S

%Calm 16

S

%Calm 12


Almost one-third of the time the winds will blow
strongly from the south to southeast.


Sandspit
Wind Frequency by Direction
Summer
N

Sandspit
Wind Frequency by Direction
Winter
N

NW

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

NE

NW

30%

25%

NE

20%

15%

10%

5%

W

E

W

E

SW

SE

SW

S


The winds at Sandspit are a product of only a limited number of influences.
The
southeast winds occur ahead of approaching low pressure systems.
Beginning fairly
light, these  southeast  winds  will  increase  as  they  are  channelled  between  the 
Coast Mountains and the Insular Mountains.
At the peak of a storm, winds can be
impressive at Sandspit with the winds being even stronger over Hecate Strait.
It has
been noted by forecasters that if the isobars on a surface weather map are oriented
more northwest-southeast than north-south, then convergence will cause the winds
to be strongest over the Sandspit.


The westerly wind is a channelled wind through Skidegate Inlet.
Sandspit Airport
will  frequently  show  strong, gusty  westerly  winds  behind  a  front  that  will  last  for 
several  hours, then  begin  to  diminish.
These  westerly  winds  will, however, persist
until  the  high  pressure  ridge  that  is  following  the  frontal  system  moves  across  the
area.
The  nicest  conditions  in  winter  occur  during  times  of  outflow  winds
through the mainland inlets, although snow showers can be a problem over Hecate
Strait and along the eastern shores.
Situated  at  the  junction  of  several  valleys, the  wind  pattern  at  Terrace  Airport

shows the strong influence of topography and pressure gradient.


During the summer months, the winds are quite variable and blow from almost all
quadrants.
The  most  prominent  wind  is  a  southerly  that  blows  out  of  the  Kitimat
River Valley from Douglas Channel.
This wind usually occurs ahead of an approach-
ing frontal system.
This southerly wind also occurs in the summer when there is a
thermal trough inland and a ridge of high pressure along the coast.
The other promi-
nent  wind  is  a  northerly  drainage  wind  out  of  the  Kitsumkalem  River  Valley.
The
winds do blow easterly and westerly over the airport but are seldom strong.


Terrace
Wind Frequency by Direction
Summer
N

Terrace
Wind Frequency by Direction
Winter
N

NW

50

40

30

20

10

NE

NW

50

40

NE

30

20

10

W

E

W

E

SW

S

SE

%Calm 16

SW

SE


%Calm 20

S

BC-E  11/12/05  11:32 PM  Page 192

192

CHAPTER FIVE 

The  influence  of  cold  air  and  falling  pressure  along  the  coast  ahead  of  a  strong
weather system is evident in the winter wind pattern at Terrace.
North winds are very
common ahead of a weather system.
These winds also occur in outflow situations and
can result in near blizzard conditions.
Just ahead of an approaching frontal system, the
winds  will  often  switch  to  a  southerly  from  the  Kitimat  River  Valley  as  warm  air
begins to move into the area from the coast.


During  the  winter, upslope  conditions  off  the  coast  mixing  with  cold  air  from  the
interior will produce low cloud and poor visibility in rain or snow, depending on the
temperature.
Even  when  the  precipitation
stops, all too often radiation fog forms, rapidly producing prolonged IFR conditions.


With
the Fraser Valley extending off to the east and the Strait of Georgia lying in a rough
northwest-southeast line just to its west, the winds are strongly influenced by topog-
raphy and season.


During the summer months, the winds are predominately east or west.
The west
wind tends to be a sea breeze while the east wind is a drainage wind coming out of
the Fraser Valley.
Minor frontal systems do move across the area resulting in a south-
east wind ahead of the front changing to a northwest wind in its wake.
Seven percent
of the time the winds are calm and 85% of the time the winds are less than 10 knots.

Only on the rare occasion do winds exceed 20 knots.


Vancouver
Wind Frequency by Direction
Summer
N

NW

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

Vancouver
Wind Frequency by Direction
Winter
N

50%

NE

NW

40%

NE

30%

20%

10%

W

E

W

E

SW

SE


%Calm 10.0

S

S

The winter winds show a similar pattern but are stronger in strength.
The easterly
wind is especially noticeable.
Added to the normal easterly drainage wind, that occurs

BC-E  11/12/05  11:32 PM  Page 194

194

CHAPTER FIVE 

almost  every  night  at  Vancouver  Airport, is  the  enhanced  easterly  winds  ahead  of
approaching coastal lows and arctic outflow winds that occur once or twice per winter.


Victoria
Wind Frequency by Direction
Summer
N

Victoria
Wind Frequency by Direction
Winter
N

NW

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

NE

NW

30%

25%

NE

20%

15%

10%

5%

W

E

W

E

SW

SE

SW

S


%Calm 8.0

Victoria Airport is not noted for its winds; in fact, about 90 percent of the time the
winds  are  less  than  10  knots.
In  winter, the  winds  at  Victoria  Airport  are  almost
equally distributed around the compass, except for a strong preference for a westerly

BC-E  11/12/05  11:32 PM  
This  wind  is  a  katabatic  flow  off  of  the  Insular  mountains, occurs  most
nights, and tends to be light, 5 to 10 knots.
Winds from other directions also tend to
be light, except for southeast winds which occur ahead of weather systems crossing
Vancouver Island, and southwest winds that occur in the wake of these systems.
Summer winds are also mainly light and show a similar preference for the katabatic
westerly flow.
However, there is an increased occurrence of east to southeast winds.

These  winds  are  largely  sea  breeze  in  nature  and  occur  during  the  afternoon  and 
early evening.


As such, the low cloud in precipitation tends to
take longer to form ahead of an approaching frontal system and lifts to above 1,000
feet fairly quickly in its wake.
In such a case, the katabatic wind tends to carry it onto the airport near 0900 UTC,
and it can persist to late morning, 1700 UTC or so.


During the winter, Northeast “Strait effect” winds can bring snow showers and low
visibilities as cold air funnels out of the mainland inlets and valleys.
Some say that part
of the reason that Victoria received much more snow during Storm ’96 was due to
this local effect.


Williams Lake
Wind Frequency by Direction
Summer
N

Williams Lake
Wind Frequency by Direction
Winter
N

NW

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

NE

NW

NE

40%

35%

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%
5%

W

E

W

E

SW

SE

SW


The summer winds at Williams Lake are quite benign, being calm almost 30 per-
cent of the time and less than 10 knots almost 90 percent of the time.
When wind
does occur, it shows a strong bias to being either from the northwest or southeast.

Winds continue to remain calm almost 30 percent of
the  time, and  less  than  10  knots, around  86  percent  of  the  time.
Of  note  is  the 
preference for southeast winds over all other directions.
Ahead  of  frontal 
systems, the southeasterly winds frequently develop along the Fraser River and often
reach values of 20 gusting to 30 or more knots.
However, behind the front, the cold
northwesterly winds tend to be confined behind the arctic front.


BC-E  11/12/05  11:32 PM  Page 199

LAKP-British Columbia

199

)

%

(

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

)

%

(

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

25

20

15

10

5

0

25

20

15

10

5

0

Frequency of ceilings below 1000 feet and/or visibility below 3 miles
Williams Lake

Summer

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

10 11 12 13
9
Time of Day (UTC)

14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23

Frequency of ceilings below 1000 feet and/or visibility below 3 miles
Williams Lake

Winter

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

10 11 12 13
9
Time of Day (UTC)

14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23

 
 
BC-E  11/12/05  11:32 PM  Page 200

200

BC-E  11/12/05  11:32 PM  Page 201

LAKP-British Columbia

201

Glossary of Weather Terms

anabatic wind - a local wind which blows up a slope heated by sunshine.

advection - the horizontal transportation of air or atmospheric properties.


anticyclone - an area of high atmospheric pressure which has a closed circulation

that is anticyclonic (clockwise) in the Northern Hemisphere.

blizzard - a winter storm with winds exceeding 40 km/h, with visibility reduced by
falling or blowing snow to less than one kilometre, with high windchill values
and lasting for at least three hours.
All regional definitions contain the same
wind speed and visibility criteria but differ in the required duration and tem-
perature criterion.


cat’s paw – a cat paw-like, ripple signature on water given by strong downdrafts or

outflow winds.
A good indication of turbulence and wind shear.


ceiling - either (a) the height above the surface of the base of the lowest layer of
clouds or obscuring phenomena (i.e. smoke) that hides more than half of the
sky; (b) the vertical visibility into an obstruction to vision (i.e. fog).

chinook - a warm dry wind blowing down the slopes of the Rocky Mountains and

over the adjacent plains.


It can occur in cloud and is caused by wind shear.


convergence - a condition that exists when the distribution of winds in a given area
is such that there is a net horizontal inflow of air into the area; the effect is to
create lift.


Indicates a development of the low.

deformation zone - an area in the atmosphere where winds converge along one axis
and diverge along another.
Where the winds converge, the air is forced upward
and it is in these areas where deformation zones (or axes of deformation as they
are sometimes referred to) can produce clouds and precipitation.

disturbance - applied loosely: (a) any small-sized low pressure system; (b) an area

where the weather, wind, and air pressure show signs of cyclonic development;
(c) any deviation in flow or pressure that is associated with a disturbed state in
the weather; and (d) any individual circulatory system within the primary circu-
lation of the atmosphere.


divergence - a condition that exists when the distribution of winds in a given area is

such that there is a net horizontal outflow of air from the area.


downdraft - a small scale downward current of air; observed on the lee side of large
objects that  restrict the smooth flow of air or in or near precipitation areas
associated with cumuliform clouds.


downburst - an exceptionally strong downdraft beneath a thunderstorm usually

accompanied by a deluge of precipitation.


Föhn wind (foehn wind)- a warm dry wind on the lee side of a mountain range,

whose temperature is increased as the wind descends down the slope.
It is 
created when air flows downhill from a high elevation, raising the temperature
by adiabatic compression.


BC-E  11/12/05  11:32 PM  Page 203

LAKP-British Columbia

203

Table 1 - The Fujita Scale

F-Scale 
Number

FO 

F1 

 F2 

F3

F4 

F5

 Intensity Phrase  Wind Speed 

 Type of Damage Done

(kts)

35-62

Weak
Tornado 

Moderate
 Tornado

 63-97  

Some damage to chimneys; breaks branches off trees; 
pushes over shallow-rooted trees; damages sign boards.


The lower limit is the beginning of hurricane wind speed; 
peels surface off roofs; mobile homes pushed off foundations 
or overturned; moving autos pushed off the roads; attached 
garages may be destroyed.

 
gust - a sudden, rapid and brief increase in wind speed.
In Canada, gusts are
reported when the highest peak speed is at least 5 knots higher than the 
average wind and the highest peak speed is at least 15 knots.


gust front - the leading edge of the downdraft outflow ahead of a thunderstorm.


hurricane – an intense tropical weather system with a well defined circulation and
maximum sustained winds of 64 knots or higher.
In the western Pacific, hurri-
canes are called “typhoons,” and similar storms in the Indian Ocean are called
“cyclones” (see Table 2 for hurricane intensitites).

 
Table 2 - Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale

Category
#
1
2
3
4
5

 Sustained Winds
(kts)

64-82

83-95

96-113

114-135

>155

Damage

Minimal

Moderate

Extensive

Extreme

Catastrophic  

  
BC-E  11/12/05  11:32 PM  Page 204

204

GLOSSARY 

icing - any deposit of ice forming on an object.


instability - a state of the atmosphere where the vertical distribution of temperature

is such that a parcel displaced from its initial position will continue to ascend.

inversion - an increase of temperature with height - a reversal of the normal

decrease of temperature with height.


isothermal layer - equal or constant temperature with height.


jet stream - a quasi-horizontal stream of wind concentrated within a narrow band;

generally located just below the tropopause.


katabatic wind - downslope gravitational flow of colder, denser air beneath the
warmer, lighter air.
Also known as “drainage wind” or “mountain breeze”.

Strength can vary from gentle to extremely violent winds.


lapse rate - the rate of change of an atmospheric variable (usually temperature) with

height.


lightning - any and all forms of visible electrical discharge produced by a thunder-

storm.


BC-E  11/12/05  11:32 PM  Page 205

LAKP-British Columbia

205

plow wind - usually associated with the spreading out of a downburst from a thun-
derstorm; a strong, straight-line wind in advance of a thunderstorm that often
results in severe damage.


precipitation - any and all forms of water particles, whether liquid or solid, that fall

from the atmosphere and reach the surface.


rime icing - the formation of a white or milky and opaque granular deposit of ice

formed by the rapid freezing of supercooled water droplets.

saturation - the condition in the atmosphere where actual water vapour present is

the maximum possible at the existing temperature.

shower - precipitation from cumuliform cloud; characterized by suddenness of
beginning and ending, by rapid changes in intensity, and usually by rapid
changes in the appearance of the sky.


In Canada, a squall is reported when

the wind increases by at least 15 knots over the average speed for a duration of
at least 2 minutes and the wind reaches a speed of at least 20 knots.


squall line - a non-frontal line or narrow band of active thunderstorms.


stability - a state of  the atmosphere where the vertical distribution of temperature

is such that a parcel will resist displacement from its initial position.

stratiform - term descriptive of clouds of extensive horizontal development; flat,

lacking definition.


stratosphere - the atmospheric layer above the tropopause; characterized by slight

increase in temperature from base to top, very stable, low moisture content and
absence of cloud.

subsidence - the downward motion of air over a large area resulting in dynamic

heating.


supercooled water - liquid water at temperatures below freezing.


thunderstorm - a local storm invariably produced by a cumulonimbus cloud, and

always accompanied by lightning and thunder.


troposphere - the portion of the earth’s atmosphere from the surface to the

tropopause; characterized by decreasing temperature with height and 
appreciable water vapour.
wind - air in motion relative to the earth’s surface; normally horizontal motion.


wind direction - the direction from which the wind is blowing.


wind speed - rate of wind movement expressed as distance per unit time.


wind shear - the rate of change of wind direction and/or speed per unit distance;

conventionally expressed as vertical and horizontal wind shear.


zonal wind - a west wind; conventionally used to describe large-scale flow that is

neither cyclonic or anticyclonic; also called zonal flow.


For float plane operation, this symbol is used to denote areas where winds and 
significant waves can make landings and takeoffs dangerous or impossible.


Turbulence symbol
This standard symbol for turbulence is also used to indicate areas known for 
significant windshear, as well as potentially hazardous downdrafts.


Strong wind symbol (straight arrow)

This arrow is used to show areas prone to very strong winds and also indicates the 
typical direction of these winds.
Where these winds encounter changing topography 
(hills, valley bends, coastlines, islands), turbulence, although not always indicated, 
can be expected.


This symbol is similar to the strong wind symbol except that the winds are constricted 
or channeled by topography.  
In this case, winds in the narrow portion could be very 
strong while surrounding locations receive much lighter winds.


This standard symbol for snow shows areas prone to very heavy snowfall.


Thunderstorm symbol (half circle with anvil top)

This standard symbol for cumulonimbus (CB) cloud is used to denote areas 
prone to thunderstorm activity. 


